\input texinfo
@setfilename ldint.info
@c Copyright 1992, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001,
@c 2003, 2007
@c Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Ld-Internals: (ldint).	The GNU linker internals.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@copying
This file documents the internals of the GNU linker ld.

Copyright @copyright{} 1992, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2007
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
Contributed by Cygnus Support.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Funding
Free Software'', the Front-Cover texts being (a) (see below), and with
the Back-Cover Texts being (b) (see below).  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@end copying

@iftex
@finalout
@setchapternewpage off
@settitle GNU Linker Internals
@titlepage
@title{A guide to the internals of the GNU linker}
@author Per Bothner, Steve Chamberlain, Ian Lance Taylor, DJ Delorie
@author Cygnus Support
@page

@tex
\def\$#1${{#1}}  % Kluge: collect RCS revision info without $...$
\xdef\manvers{2.10.91}  % For use in headers, footers too
{\parskip=0pt
\hfill Cygnus Support\par
\hfill \manvers\par
\hfill \TeX{}info \texinfoversion\par
}
@end tex

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1992, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 1998, 2000
Free Software Foundation, Inc.

      Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
      under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
      or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
      with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
      Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
      section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".

@end titlepage
@end iftex

@node Top
@top

This file documents the internals of the GNU linker @code{ld}.  It is a
collection of miscellaneous information with little form at this point.
Mostly, it is a repository into which you can put information about
GNU @code{ld} as you discover it (or as you design changes to @code{ld}).

This document is distributed under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".

@menu
* README::			The README File
* Emulations::			How linker emulations are generated
* Emulation Walkthrough::	A Walkthrough of a Typical Emulation
* Architecture Specific::	Some Architecture Specific Notes
* GNU Free Documentation License::  GNU Free Documentation License
@end menu

@node README
@chapter The @file{README} File

Check the @file{README} file; it often has useful information that does not
appear anywhere else in the directory.

@node Emulations
@chapter How linker emulations are generated

Each linker target has an @dfn{emulation}.  The emulation includes the
default linker script, and certain emulations also modify certain types
of linker behaviour.

Emulations are created during the build process by the shell script
@file{genscripts.sh}.

The @file{genscripts.sh} script starts by reading a file in the
@file{emulparams} directory.  This is a shell script which sets various
shell variables used by @file{genscripts.sh} and the other shell scripts
it invokes.

The @file{genscripts.sh} script will invoke a shell script in the
@file{scripttempl} directory in order to create default linker scripts
written in the linker command language.  The @file{scripttempl} script
will be invoked 5 (or, in some cases, 6) times, with different
assignments to shell variables, to create different default scripts.
The choice of script is made based on the command line options.

After creating the scripts, @file{genscripts.sh} will invoke yet another
shell script, this time in the @file{emultempl} directory.  That shell
script will create the emulation source file, which contains C code.
This C code permits the linker emulation to override various linker
behaviours.  Most targets use the generic emulation code, which is in
@file{emultempl/generic.em}.

To summarize, @file{genscripts.sh} reads three shell scripts: an
emulation parameters script in the @file{emulparams} directory, a linker
script generation script in the @file{scripttempl} directory, and an
emulation source file generation script in the @file{emultempl}
directory.

For example, the Sun 4 linker sets up variables in
@file{emulparams/sun4.sh}, creates linker scripts using
@file{scripttempl/aout.sc}, and creates the emulation code using
@file{emultempl/sunos.em}.

Note that the linker can support several emulations simultaneously,
depending upon how it is configured.  An emulation can be selected with
the @code{-m} option.  The @code{-V} option will list all supported
emulations.

@menu
* emulation parameters::        @file{emulparams} scripts
* linker scripts::              @file{scripttempl} scripts
* linker emulations::           @file{emultempl} scripts
@end menu

@node emulation parameters
@section @file{emulparams} scripts

Each target selects a particular file in the @file{emulparams} directory
by setting the shell variable @code{targ_emul} in @file{configure.tgt}.
This shell variable is used by the @file{configure} script to control
building an emulation source file.

Certain conventions are enforced.  Suppose the @code{targ_emul} variable
is set to @var{emul} in @file{configure.tgt}.  The name of the emulation
shell script will be @file{emulparams/@var{emul}.sh}.  The
@file{Makefile} must have a target named @file{e@var{emul}.c}; this
target must depend upon @file{emulparams/@var{emul}.sh}, as well as the
appropriate scripts in the @file{scripttempl} and @file{emultempl}
directories.  The @file{Makefile} target must invoke @code{GENSCRIPTS}
with two arguments: @var{emul}, and the value of the make variable
@code{tdir_@var{emul}}.  The value of the latter variable will be set by
the @file{configure} script, and is used to set the default target
directory to search.

By convention, the @file{emulparams/@var{emul}.sh} shell script should
only set shell variables.  It may set shell variables which are to be
interpreted by the @file{scripttempl} and the @file{emultempl} scripts.
Certain shell variables are interpreted directly by the
@file{genscripts.sh} script.

Here is a list of shell variables interpreted by @file{genscripts.sh},
as well as some conventional shell variables interpreted by the
@file{scripttempl} and @file{emultempl} scripts.

@table @code
@item SCRIPT_NAME
This is the name of the @file{scripttempl} script to use.  If
@code{SCRIPT_NAME} is set to @var{script}, @file{genscripts.sh} will use
the script @file{scripttempl/@var{script}.sc}.

@item TEMPLATE_NAME
This is the name of the @file{emultempl} script to use.  If
@code{TEMPLATE_NAME} is set to @var{template}, @file{genscripts.sh} will
use the script @file{emultempl/@var{template}.em}.  If this variable is
not set, the default value is @samp{generic}.

@item GENERATE_SHLIB_SCRIPT
If this is set to a nonempty string, @file{genscripts.sh} will invoke
the @file{scripttempl} script an extra time to create a shared library
script.  @ref{linker scripts}.

@item OUTPUT_FORMAT
This is normally set to indicate the BFD output format use (e.g.,
@samp{"a.out-sunos-big"}.  The @file{scripttempl} script will normally
use it in an @code{OUTPUT_FORMAT} expression in the linker script.

@item ARCH
This is normally set to indicate the architecture to use (e.g.,
@samp{sparc}).  The @file{scripttempl} script will normally use it in an
@code{OUTPUT_ARCH} expression in the linker script.

@item ENTRY
Some @file{scripttempl} scripts use this to set the entry address, in an
@code{ENTRY} expression in the linker script.

@item TEXT_START_ADDR
Some @file{scripttempl} scripts use this to set the start address of the
@samp{.text} section.

@item NONPAGED_TEXT_START_ADDR
If this is defined, the @file{genscripts.sh} script sets
@code{TEXT_START_ADDR} to its value before running the
@file{scripttempl} script for the @code{-n} and @code{-N} options
(@pxref{linker scripts}).

@item SEGMENT_SIZE
The @file{genscripts.sh} script uses this to set the default value of
@code{DATA_ALIGNMENT} when running the @file{scripttempl} script.

@item TARGET_PAGE_SIZE
If @code{SEGMENT_SIZE} is not defined, the @file{genscripts.sh} script
uses this to define it.

@item ALIGNMENT
Some @file{scripttempl} scripts set this to a number to pass to
@code{ALIGN} to set the required alignment for the @code{end} symbol.
@end table

@node linker scripts
@section @file{scripttempl} scripts

Each linker target uses a @file{scripttempl} script to generate the
default linker scripts.  The name of the @file{scripttempl} script is
set by the @code{SCRIPT_NAME} variable in the @file{emulparams} script.
If @code{SCRIPT_NAME} is set to @var{script}, @code{genscripts.sh} will
invoke @file{scripttempl/@var{script}.sc}.

The @file{genscripts.sh} script will invoke the @file{scripttempl}
script 5 to 8 times.  Each time it will set the shell variable
@code{LD_FLAG} to a different value.  When the linker is run, the
options used will direct it to select a particular script.  (Script
selection is controlled by the @code{get_script} emulation entry point;
this describes the conventional behaviour).

The @file{scripttempl} script should just write a linker script, written
in the linker command language, to standard output.  If the emulation
name--the name of the @file{emulparams} file without the @file{.sc}
extension--is @var{emul}, then the output will be directed to
@file{ldscripts/@var{emul}.@var{extension}} in the build directory,
where @var{extension} changes each time the @file{scripttempl} script is
invoked.

Here is the list of values assigned to @code{LD_FLAG}.

@table @code
@item (empty)
The script generated is used by default (when none of the following
cases apply).  The output has an extension of @file{.x}.
@item n
The script generated is used when the linker is invoked with the
@code{-n} option.  The output has an extension of @file{.xn}.
@item N
The script generated is used when the linker is invoked with the
@code{-N} option.  The output has an extension of @file{.xbn}.
@item r
The script generated is used when the linker is invoked with the
@code{-r} option.  The output has an extension of @file{.xr}.
@item u
The script generated is used when the linker is invoked with the
@code{-Ur} option.  The output has an extension of @file{.xu}.
@item shared
The @file{scripttempl} script is only invoked with @code{LD_FLAG} set to
this value if @code{GENERATE_SHLIB_SCRIPT} is defined in the
@file{emulparams} file.  The @file{emultempl} script must arrange to use
this script at the appropriate time, normally when the linker is invoked
with the @code{-shared} option.  The output has an extension of
@file{.xs}.
@item c
The @file{scripttempl} script is only invoked with @code{LD_FLAG} set to
this value if @code{GENERATE_COMBRELOC_SCRIPT} is defined in the
@file{emulparams} file or if @code{SCRIPT_NAME} is @code{elf}. The
@file{emultempl} script must arrange to use this script at the appropriate
time, normally when the linker is invoked with the @code{-z combreloc}
option.  The output has an extension of
@file{.xc}.
@item cshared
The @file{scripttempl} script is only invoked with @code{LD_FLAG} set to
this value if @code{GENERATE_COMBRELOC_SCRIPT} is defined in the
@file{emulparams} file or if @code{SCRIPT_NAME} is @code{elf} and
@code{GENERATE_SHLIB_SCRIPT} is defined in the @file{emulparams} file.
The @file{emultempl} script must arrange to use this script at the
appropriate time, normally when the linker is invoked with the @code{-shared
-z combreloc} option.  The output has an extension of @file{.xsc}.
@end table

Besides the shell variables set by the @file{emulparams} script, and the
@code{LD_FLAG} variable, the @file{genscripts.sh} script will set
certain variables for each run of the @file{scripttempl} script.

@table @code
@item RELOCATING
This will be set to a non-empty string when the linker is doing a final
relocation (e.g., all scripts other than @code{-r} and @code{-Ur}).

@item CONSTRUCTING
This will be set to a non-empty string when the linker is building
global constructor and destructor tables (e.g., all scripts other than
@code{-r}).

@item DATA_ALIGNMENT
This will be set to an @code{ALIGN} expression when the output should be
page aligned, or to @samp{.} when generating the @code{-N} script.

@item CREATE_SHLIB
This will be set to a non-empty string when generating a @code{-shared}
script.

@item COMBRELOC
This will be set to a non-empty string when generating @code{-z combreloc}
scripts to a temporary file name which can be used during script generation.
@end table

The conventional way to write a @file{scripttempl} script is to first
set a few shell variables, and then write out a linker script using
@code{cat} with a here document.  The linker script will use variable
substitutions, based on the above variables and those set in the
@file{emulparams} script, to control its behaviour.

When there are parts of the @file{scripttempl} script which should only
be run when doing a final relocation, they should be enclosed within a
variable substitution based on @code{RELOCATING}.  For example, on many
targets special symbols such as @code{_end} should be defined when doing
a final link.  Naturally, those symbols should not be defined when doing
a relocatable link using @code{-r}.  The @file{scripttempl} script
could use a construct like this to define those symbols:
@smallexample
  $@{RELOCATING+ _end = .;@}
@end smallexample
This will do the symbol assignment only if the @code{RELOCATING}
variable is defined.

The basic job of the linker script is to put the sections in the correct
order, and at the correct memory addresses.  For some targets, the
linker script may have to do some other operations.

For example, on most MIPS platforms, the linker is responsible for
defining the special symbol @code{_gp}, used to initialize the
@code{$gp} register.  It must be set to the start of the small data
section plus @code{0x8000}.  Naturally, it should only be defined when
doing a final relocation.  This will typically be done like this:
@smallexample
  $@{RELOCATING+ _gp = ALIGN(16) + 0x8000;@}
@end smallexample
This line would appear just before the sections which compose the small
data section (@samp{.sdata}, @samp{.sbss}).  All those sections would be
contiguous in memory.

Many COFF systems build constructor tables in the linker script.  The
compiler will arrange to output the address of each global constructor
in a @samp{.ctor} section, and the address of each global destructor in
a @samp{.dtor} section (this is done by defining
@code{ASM_OUTPUT_CONSTRUCTOR} and @code{ASM_OUTPUT_DESTRUCTOR} in the
@code{gcc} configuration files).  The @code{gcc} runtime support
routines expect the constructor table to be named @code{__CTOR_LIST__}.
They expect it to be a list of words, with the first word being the
count of the number of entries.  There should be a trailing zero word.
(Actually, the count may be -1 if the trailing word is present, and the
trailing word may be omitted if the count is correct, but, as the
@code{gcc} behaviour has changed slightly over the years, it is safest
to provide both).  Here is a typical way that might be handled in a
@file{scripttempl} file.
@smallexample
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ __CTOR_LIST__ = .;@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ LONG((__CTOR_END__ - __CTOR_LIST__) / 4 - 2)@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ *(.ctors)@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ LONG(0)@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ __CTOR_END__ = .;@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ __DTOR_LIST__ = .;@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ LONG((__DTOR_END__ - __DTOR_LIST__) / 4 - 2)@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ *(.dtors)@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ LONG(0)@}
    $@{CONSTRUCTING+ __DTOR_END__ = .;@}
@end smallexample
The use of @code{CONSTRUCTING} ensures that these linker script commands
will only appear when the linker is supposed to be building the
constructor and destructor tables.  This example is written for a target
which uses 4 byte pointers.

Embedded systems often need to set a stack address.  This is normally
best done by using the @code{PROVIDE} construct with a default stack
address.  This permits the user to easily override the stack address
using the @code{--defsym} option.  Here is an example:
@smallexample
  $@{RELOCATING+ PROVIDE (__stack = 0x80000000);@}
@end smallexample
The value of the symbol @code{__stack} would then be used in the startup
code to initialize the stack pointer.

@node linker emulations
@section @file{emultempl} scripts

Each linker target uses an @file{emultempl} script to generate the
emulation code.  The name of the @file{emultempl} script is set by the
@code{TEMPLATE_NAME} variable in the @file{emulparams} script.  If the
@code{TEMPLATE_NAME} variable is not set, the default is
@samp{generic}.  If the value of @code{TEMPLATE_NAME} is @var{template},
@file{genscripts.sh} will use @file{emultempl/@var{template}.em}.

Most targets use the generic @file{emultempl} script,
@file{emultempl/generic.em}.  A different @file{emultempl} script is
only needed if the linker must support unusual actions, such as linking
against shared libraries.

The @file{emultempl} script is normally written as a simple invocation
of @code{cat} with a here document.  The document will use a few
variable substitutions.  Typically each function names uses a
substitution involving @code{EMULATION_NAME}, for ease of debugging when
the linker supports multiple emulations.

Every function and variable in the emitted file should be static.  The
only globally visible object must be named
@code{ld_@var{EMULATION_NAME}_emulation}, where @var{EMULATION_NAME} is
the name of the emulation set in @file{configure.tgt} (this is also the
name of the @file{emulparams} file without the @file{.sh} extension).
The @file{genscripts.sh} script will set the shell variable
@code{EMULATION_NAME} before invoking the @file{emultempl} script.

The @code{ld_@var{EMULATION_NAME}_emulation} variable must be a
@code{struct ld_emulation_xfer_struct}, as defined in @file{ldemul.h}.
It defines a set of function pointers which are invoked by the linker,
as well as strings for the emulation name (normally set from the shell
variable @code{EMULATION_NAME} and the default BFD target name (normally
set from the shell variable @code{OUTPUT_FORMAT} which is normally set
by the @file{emulparams} file).

The @file{genscripts.sh} script will set the shell variable
@code{COMPILE_IN} when it invokes the @file{emultempl} script for the
default emulation.  In this case, the @file{emultempl} script should
include the linker scripts directly, and return them from the
@code{get_scripts} entry point.  When the emulation is not the default,
the @code{get_scripts} entry point should just return a file name.  See
@file{emultempl/generic.em} for an example of how this is done.

At some point, the linker emulation entry points should be documented.

@node Emulation Walkthrough
@chapter A Walkthrough of a Typical Emulation

This chapter is to help people who are new to the way emulations
interact with the linker, or who are suddenly thrust into the position
of having to work with existing emulations.  It will discuss the files
you need to be aware of.  It will tell you when the given "hooks" in
the emulation will be called.  It will, hopefully, give you enough
information about when and how things happen that you'll be able to
get by.  As always, the source is the definitive reference to this.

The starting point for the linker is in @file{ldmain.c} where
@code{main} is defined.  The bulk of the code that's emulation
specific will initially be in @code{emultempl/@var{emulation}.em} but
will end up in @code{e@var{emulation}.c} when the build is done.
Most of the work to select and interface with emulations is in
@code{ldemul.h} and @code{ldemul.c}.  Specifically, @code{ldemul.h}
defines the @code{ld_emulation_xfer_struct} structure your emulation
exports.

Your emulation file exports a symbol
@code{ld_@var{EMULATION_NAME}_emulation}.  If your emulation is
selected (it usually is, since usually there's only one),
@code{ldemul.c} sets the variable @var{ld_emulation} to point to it.
@code{ldemul.c} also defines a number of API functions that interface
to your emulation, like @code{ldemul_after_parse} which simply calls
your @code{ld_@var{EMULATION}_emulation.after_parse} function.  For
the rest of this section, the functions will be mentioned, but you
should assume the indirect reference to your emulation also.

We will also skip or gloss over parts of the link process that don't
relate to emulations, like setting up internationalization.

After initialization, @code{main} selects an emulation by pre-scanning
the command line arguments.  It calls @code{ldemul_choose_target} to
choose a target.  If you set @code{choose_target} to
@code{ldemul_default_target}, it picks your @code{target_name} by
default.

@code{main} calls @code{ldemul_before_parse}, then @code{parse_args}.
@code{parse_args} calls @code{ldemul_parse_args} for each arg, which
must update the @code{getopt} globals if it recognizes the argument.
If the emulation doesn't recognize it, then parse_args checks to see
if it recognizes it.

Now that the emulation has had access to all its command-line options,
@code{main} calls @code{ldemul_set_symbols}.  This can be used for any
initialization that may be affected by options.  It is also supposed
to set up any variables needed by the emulation script.

@code{main} now calls @code{ldemul_get_script} to get the emulation
script to use (based on arguments, no doubt, @pxref{Emulations}) and
runs it.  While parsing, @code{ldgram.y} may call @code{ldemul_hll} or
@code{ldemul_syslib} to handle the @code{HLL} or @code{SYSLIB}
commands.  It may call @code{ldemul_unrecognized_file} if you asked
the linker to link a file it doesn't recognize.  It will call
@code{ldemul_recognized_file} for each file it does recognize, in case
the emulation wants to handle some files specially.  All the while,
it's loading the files (possibly calling
@code{ldemul_open_dynamic_archive}) and symbols and stuff.  After it's
done reading the script, @code{main} calls @code{ldemul_after_parse}.
Use the after-parse hook to set up anything that depends on stuff the
script might have set up, like the entry point.

@code{main} next calls @code{lang_process} in @code{ldlang.c}.  This
appears to be the main core of the linking itself, as far as emulation
hooks are concerned(*).  It first opens the output file's BFD, calling
@code{ldemul_set_output_arch}, and calls
@code{ldemul_create_output_section_statements} in case you need to use
other means to find or create object files (i.e. shared libraries
found on a path, or fake stub objects).  Despite the name, nobody
creates output sections here.

(*) In most cases, the BFD library does the bulk of the actual
linking, handling symbol tables, symbol resolution, relocations, and
building the final output file.  See the BFD reference for all the
details.  Your emulation is usually concerned more with managing
things at the file and section level, like "put this here, add this
section", etc.

Next, the objects to be linked are opened and BFDs created for them,
and @code{ldemul_after_open} is called.  At this point, you have all
the objects and symbols loaded, but none of the data has been placed
yet.

Next comes the Big Linking Thingy (except for the parts BFD does).
All input sections are mapped to output sections according to the
script.  If a section doesn't get mapped by default,
@code{ldemul_place_orphan} will get called to figure out where it goes.
Next it figures out the offsets for each section, calling
@code{ldemul_before_allocation} before and
@code{ldemul_after_allocation} after deciding where each input section
ends up in the output sections.

The last part of @code{lang_process} is to figure out all the symbols'
values.  After assigning final values to the symbols,
@code{ldemul_finish} is called, and after that, any undefined symbols
are turned into fatal errors.

OK, back to @code{main}, which calls @code{ldwrite} in
@file{ldwrite.c}.  @code{ldwrite} calls BFD's final_link, which does
all the relocation fixups and writes the output bfd to disk, and we're
done.

In summary,

@itemize @bullet

@item @code{main()} in @file{ldmain.c}
@item @file{emultempl/@var{EMULATION}.em} has your code
@item @code{ldemul_choose_target} (defaults to your @code{target_name})
@item @code{ldemul_before_parse}
@item Parse argv, calls @code{ldemul_parse_args} for each
@item @code{ldemul_set_symbols}
@item @code{ldemul_get_script}
@item parse script

@itemize @bullet
@item may call @code{ldemul_hll} or @code{ldemul_syslib}
@item may call @code{ldemul_open_dynamic_archive}
@end itemize

@item @code{ldemul_after_parse}
@item @code{lang_process()} in @file{ldlang.c}

@itemize @bullet
@item create @code{output_bfd}
@item @code{ldemul_set_output_arch}
@item @code{ldemul_create_output_section_statements}
@item read objects, create input bfds - all symbols exist, but have no values
@item may call @code{ldemul_unrecognized_file}
@item will call @code{ldemul_recognized_file}
@item @code{ldemul_after_open}
@item map input sections to output sections
@item may call @code{ldemul_place_orphan} for remaining sections
@item @code{ldemul_before_allocation}
@item gives input sections offsets into output sections, places output sections
@item @code{ldemul_after_allocation} - section addresses valid
@item assigns values to symbols
@item @code{ldemul_finish} - symbol values valid
@end itemize

@item output bfd is written to disk

@end itemize

@node Architecture Specific
@chapter Some Architecture Specific Notes

This is the place for notes on the behavior of @code{ld} on
specific platforms.  Currently, only Intel x86 is documented (and 
of that, only the auto-import behavior for DLLs).

@menu
* ix86::                        Intel x86
@end menu

@node ix86
@section Intel x86

@table @emph
@code{ld} can create DLLs that operate with various runtimes available
on a common x86 operating system.  These runtimes include native (using 
the mingw "platform"), cygwin, and pw.

@item auto-import from DLLs 
@enumerate
@item
With this feature on, DLL clients can import variables from DLL 
without any concern from their side (for example, without any source
code modifications).  Auto-import can be enabled using the 
@code{--enable-auto-import} flag, or disabled via the 
@code{--disable-auto-import} flag.  Auto-import is disabled by default.

@item
This is done completely in bounds of the PE specification (to be fair,
there's a minor violation of the spec at one point, but in practice 
auto-import works on all known variants of that common x86 operating
system)  So, the resulting DLL can be used with any other PE 
compiler/linker.

@item
Auto-import is fully compatible with standard import method, in which
variables are decorated using attribute modifiers. Libraries of either
type may be mixed together.

@item
Overhead (space): 8 bytes per imported symbol, plus 20 for each
reference to it; Overhead (load time): negligible; Overhead 
(virtual/physical memory): should be less than effect of DLL 
relocation.
@end enumerate

Motivation

The obvious and only way to get rid of dllimport insanity is 
to make client access variable directly in the DLL, bypassing 
the extra dereference imposed by ordinary DLL runtime linking.
I.e., whenever client contains something like

@code{mov dll_var,%eax,}

address of dll_var in the command should be relocated to point 
into loaded DLL. The aim is to make OS loader do so, and than 
make ld help with that.  Import section of PE made following 
way: there's a vector of structures each describing imports 
from particular DLL. Each such structure points to two other 
parallel vectors: one holding imported names, and one which 
will hold address of corresponding imported name. So, the 
solution is de-vectorize these structures, making import 
locations be sparse and pointing directly into code.

Implementation

For each reference of data symbol to be imported from DLL (to 
set of which belong symbols with name <sym>, if __imp_<sym> is 
found in implib), the import fixup entry is generated. That 
entry is of type IMAGE_IMPORT_DESCRIPTOR and stored in .idata$3 
subsection. Each fixup entry contains pointer to symbol's address 
within .text section (marked with __fuN_<sym> symbol, where N is 
integer), pointer to DLL name (so, DLL name is referenced by 
multiple entries), and pointer to symbol name thunk. Symbol name 
thunk is singleton vector (__nm_th_<symbol>) pointing to 
IMAGE_IMPORT_BY_NAME structure (__nm_<symbol>) directly containing 
imported name. Here comes that "om the edge" problem mentioned above: 
PE specification rambles that name vector (OriginalFirstThunk) should 
run in parallel with addresses vector (FirstThunk), i.e. that they 
should have same number of elements and terminated with zero. We violate
this, since FirstThunk points directly into machine code. But in 
practice, OS loader implemented the sane way: it goes thru 
OriginalFirstThunk and puts addresses to FirstThunk, not something 
else. It once again should be noted that dll and symbol name 
structures are reused across fixup entries and should be there 
anyway to support standard import stuff, so sustained overhead is 
20 bytes per reference. Other question is whether having several 
IMAGE_IMPORT_DESCRIPTORS for the same DLL is possible. Answer is yes, 
it is done even by native compiler/linker (libth32's functions are in 
fact resident in windows9x kernel32.dll, so if you use it, you have 
two IMAGE_IMPORT_DESCRIPTORS for kernel32.dll). Yet other question is 
whether referencing the same PE structures several times is valid. 
The answer is why not, prohibiting that (detecting violation) would 
require more work on behalf of loader than not doing it.

@end table

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@chapter GNU Free Documentation License

                GNU Free Documentation License
                
                   Version 1.1, March 2000

 Copyright (C) 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
  51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA
     
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.


0. PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
written document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.


1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
under the terms of this License.  The "Document", below, refers to any
such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee, and is
addressed as "you".

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject.  (For example, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly and
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.  A copy that is
not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML
or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple
HTML designed for human modification.  Opaque formats include
PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that can be read and edited only
by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or
processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.


2. VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.


3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose
the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the
general network-using public has access to download anonymously at no
charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the latter
option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to
the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.


4. MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
   from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
   (which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
   of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version
   if the original publisher of that version gives permission.
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
   responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
   Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
   Document (all of its principal authors, if it has less than five).
C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
   Modified Version, as the publisher.
D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
   adjacent to the other copyright notices.
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
   giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
   terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
   and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
I. Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and add to
   it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
   publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
   there is no section entitled "History" in the Document, create one
   stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
   given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
   Version as stated in the previous sentence.
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
   public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
   the network locations given in the Document for previous versions
   it was based on.  These may be placed in the "History" section.
   You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
   least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
   publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
K. In any section entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
   preserve the section's title, and preserve in the section all the
   substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
   and/or dedications given therein.
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
   unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
   or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.
M. Delete any section entitled "Endorsements".  Such a section
   may not be included in the Modified Version.
N. Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements"
   or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.


5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled "History"
in the various original documents, forming one section entitled
"History"; likewise combine any sections entitled "Acknowledgements",
and any sections entitled "Dedications".  You must delete all sections
entitled "Endorsements."


6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.


7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version
of the Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the
compilation.  Such a compilation is called an "aggregate", and this
License does not apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled
with the Document, on account of their being thus compiled, if they
are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter
of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate.
Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.


8. TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License provided that you also include the
original English version of this License.  In case of a disagreement
between the translation and the original English version of this
License, the original English version will prevail.


9. TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.


10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.


ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

@smallexample
    Copyright (c)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.
    Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
    or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
    with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
    Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
    A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
    Free Documentation License".
@end smallexample

If you have no Invariant Sections, write "with no Invariant Sections"
instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no
Front-Cover Texts, write "no Front-Cover Texts" instead of
"Front-Cover Texts being LIST"; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

@contents
@bye
