.\" $OpenBSD: a2d_ASN1_OBJECT.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt A2D_ASN1_OBJECT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm a2d_ASN1_OBJECT
.Nd DER content octets of an ASN.1 object identifier
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/asn1.h
.Ft int
.Fo a2d_ASN1_OBJECT
.Fa "unsigned char *der_out"
.Fa "int olen"
.Fa "const char *val_in"
.Fa "int ilen"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn a2d_ASN1_OBJECT
accepts an ASCII string
.Fa val_in
of
.Fa ilen
bytes and interprets it as the numerical form of an ASN.1 object identifier.
It writes the content octets of the DER encoding of the object identifier
to the buffer
.Fa der_out
which is
.Fa olen
bytes long.
The identifier and length octets of the DER encoding are not written.
.Pp
If
.Fa ilen
is \-1, the
.Xr strlen 3
of
.Fa val_in
is used instead.
.Pp
If
.Fa der_out
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, writing the content octets is skipped
and only the return value is calculated.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn a2d_ASN1_OBJECT
returns the number of content octets that were or would be written or 0 if
.Fa ilen
is 0, if
.Fa val_in
is not a valid representation of an object identifier,
if memory allocation fails, or if the number of content octets
would be larger than
.Fa olen .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASN1_OBJECT_new 3 ,
.Xr i2d_ASN1_OBJECT 3 ,
.Xr OBJ_create 3
.Sh STANDARDS
ITU-T Recommendation X.690, also known as ISO/IEC 8825-1:
Information technology - ASN.1 encoding rules:
Specification of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical Encoding
Rules (CER) and Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER),
section 8.19: Encoding of an object identifier value
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn a2d_ASN1_OBJECT
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
