.\" $OpenBSD: a2i_ipadd.3,v 1.2 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt A2I_IPADD 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm a2i_ipadd ,
.Nm a2i_IPADDRESS ,
.Nm a2i_IPADDRESS_NC
.Nd parse Internet Protocol addresses into ASN.1 OCTET STRINGs for X.509
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509v3.h
.Ft int
.Fo a2i_ipadd
.Fa "unsigned char *ipout"
.Fa "const char *ipasc"
.Fc
.Ft ASN1_OCTET_STRING *
.Fo a2i_IPADDRESS
.Fa "const char *ipasc"
.Fc
.Ft ASN1_OCTET_STRING *
.Fo a2i_IPADDRESS_NC
.Fa "const char *ipasc"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn a2i_ipadd
and
.Fn a2i_IPADDRESS
parse the string
.Fa ipasc
containing an IPv4 or IPv6 address
in one of the following formats:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
d.d.d.d
x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x (exactly 8 words)
(x:)*x::x(:x)* (less than 8 words)
(x:)*x:: (less than 8 words)
::x(:x)* (less than 8 words)
::
(x:)*d.d.d.d (up to 6 hexadecimal words, :: can be used)
.Ed
.Pp
where each
.Ar d
represents a non-negative decimal number less than 256
with one, two or three digits and each
.Ar x
represents a non-negative hexadecimal number
with one, two, three, or four digits.
Both the lower case letters a-f and the upper case letters A-F can be used.
.Pp
.Fn a2i_ipadd
stores the bytes of the address in network byte order (big endian) starting at
.Fa ipout .
The caller is responsible for providing sufficient space;
always providing a buffer of at least 16 bytes is recommended,
even if an IPv4 address is expected, to avoid buffer overruns in case
.Fa ipasc
is malformed.
.Pp
.Fn a2i_IPADDRESS
stores the address in a newly allocated ASN.1
.Vt OCTET STRING .
.Pp
.Fn a2i_IPADDRESS_NC
expects
.Fa ipasc
to contain two addresses of the same address family in the above form,
separated by a slash
.Pq Sq /
character, and stores the concatenation of both addresses
in a newly allocated ASN.1
.Vt OCTET STRING ,
which is typically used for address/mask pairs
in name constraint extensions of CA certificates.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn a2i_ipadd
returns the number of bytes written to
.Fa ipout
in case of success, i.e. 4 for an IPv4 or 16 for an IPv6 address,
or 0 if parsing failed.
.Pp
.Fn a2i_IPADDRESS
and
.Fn a2i_IPADDRESS_NC
return the new object or
.Dv NULL
if parsing or memory allocation failed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr a2i_ASN1_STRING 3 ,
.Xr ASN1_OCTET_STRING_new 3 ,
.Xr ASN1_OCTET_STRING_set 3 ,
.Xr GENERAL_NAME_new 3 ,
.Xr IPAddressRange_new 3 ,
.Xr NAME_CONSTRAINTS_new 3 ,
.Xr s2i_ASN1_OCTET_STRING 3 ,
.Xr X509_EXTENSION_new 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5280: Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile
.Bl -dash -width 1n -compact
.It
section 4.2.1.6: Subject Alternative Name
.It
section 4.2.1.10: Name Constraints
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn a2i_IPADDRESS
and
.Fn a2i_IPADDRESS_NC
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8 and
.Fn a2i_ipadd
in OpenSSL 0.9.8e.
They have been available since
.Ox 4.5 .
.Sh CAVEATS
While some syntax errors are caught, only minimal validation takes place,
and these functions often return objects that make no sense, in particular
in the context of IPv6.
For example, the trailing :d.d.d.d syntax can be appended
to a hexadecimal part that results in twelve arbitrary bytes.
