.\" $OpenBSD: ASIdentifiers_new.3,v 1.12 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Theo Buehler <tb@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt ASIDENTIFIERS_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ASIdentifiers_new ,
.Nm ASIdentifiers_free ,
.Nm d2i_ASIdentifiers ,
.Nm i2d_ASIdentifiers
.Nd RFC 3779 autonomous system identifier delegation extensions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509v3.h
.Ft ASIdentifiers *
.Fo ASIdentifiers_new
.Fa "void"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ASIdentifiers_free
.Fa "ASIdentifiers *asid"
.Fc
.Ft ASIdentifiers *
.Fo d2i_ASIdentifiers
.Fa "ASIdentifiers **asid"
.Fa "const unsigned char **in"
.Fa "long len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo i2d_ASIdentifiers
.Fa "ASIdentifiers *asid"
.Fa "unsigned char **out"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
RFC 3779 defines two X.509v3 certificate extensions that allow the
delegation of
IP addresses and autonomous system (AS) identifiers
from the issuer to the subject of the certificate.
An
.Vt ASIdentifiers
object contains collections of individual AS numbers and
ranges of AS numbers to be delegated.
.Pp
.Fn ASIdentifiers_new
allocates and initializes a new, empty
.Vt ASIdentifiers
object that can be populated with
.Xr X509v3_asid_add_id_or_range 3 .
See
.Xr ASRange_new 3
for implementation details.
.Pp
.Fn ASIdentifiers_free
frees
.Fa asid
including any data contained in it.
If
.Fa asid
is
.Dv NULL ,
no action occurs.
.Pp
.Fn d2i_ASIdentifiers
and
.Fn i2d_ASIdentifiers
decode and encode ASN.1
.Vt ASIdentifiers
objects as defined in RFC 3779, section 3.2.3.1.
For details about the semantics, examples, caveats, and bugs, see
.Xr ASN1_item_d2i 3 .
In order for the encoding produced by
.Fn i2d_ASIdentifiers
to conform to RFC 3779,
.Fa asid
must be in
.Dq canonical form ,
see
.Xr X509v3_asid_canonize 3 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn ASIdentifiers_new
returns a new
.Vt ASIdentifiers
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Pp
.Fn d2i_ASIdentifiers
returns an
.Vt ASIdentifiers
object or
.Dv NULL
if a decoding or memory allocation error occurs.
.Pp
.Fn i2d_ASIdentifiers
returns the number of bytes successfully encoded
or a value <= 0 if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASRange_new 3 ,
.Xr crypto 3 ,
.Xr IPAddressRange_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_add_inherit 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_get_range 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_inherits 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_subset 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_validate_path 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_asid_add_id_or_range 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 3779: X.509 Extensions for IP Addresses and AS Identifiers:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
section 3: Autonomous System Identifier Delegation Extension
.El
.Pp
RFC 7020: The Internet Numbers Registry System
.Pp
RFC 7249: Internet Numbers Registries
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8e
and have been available since
.Ox 7.1 .
.Sh BUGS
There are no corresponding functions for the RFC 3779
IP address delegation extension represented by
.Vt IPAddrBlocks .
