.\" $OpenBSD: ASN1_OBJECT_new.3,v 1.17 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 99d63d4 Mar 19 12:28:58 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, 2021, 2023 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2006 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt ASN1_OBJECT_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ASN1_OBJECT_new ,
.Nm ASN1_OBJECT_create ,
.Nm ASN1_OBJECT_free
.Nd ASN.1 object identifiers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/asn1.h
.Ft ASN1_OBJECT *
.Fo ASN1_OBJECT_new
.Fa void
.Fc
.Ft ASN1_OBJECT *
.Fo ASN1_OBJECT_create
.Fa "int nid"
.Fa "unsigned char *content"
.Fa "int len"
.Fa "const char *short_name"
.Fa "const char *long_name"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ASN1_OBJECT_free
.Fa "ASN1_OBJECT *a"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt ASN1_OBJECT
object, representing an ASN.1 OBJECT IDENTIFIER.
It can hold a short name, a long name, a numeric identifier (NID),
and a sequence of integers identifying a node in the International
Object Identifier tree as specified in ITU-T recommendation X.660.
The new object is marked as dynamically allocated.
.Pp
The ASN.1 object identifier type is also represented by the
.Dv V_ASN1_OBJECT
type identifier constant.
.Pp
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_create
allocates a new
.Vt ASN1_OBJECT
with the given
.Fa nid ,
copies the
.Fa len
DER
.Fa content
octets, the
.Fa short_name ,
and the
.Fa long_name
into it, and marks the new object and all data contained in it
as dynamically allocated.
.Pp
Application programs normally use utility functions like
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3
rather than using
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_new
or
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_create
directly.
.Pp
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_free
has the following effects:
.Pp
All data contained in
.Fa a
that is marked as dynamically allocated is freed,
and the respective fields of
.Fa a
become empty.
Contained data not marked as dynamically allocated remains intact.
.Pp
If the object
.Fa a
itself is marked as dynamically allocated, it is freed.
Otherwise, the pointer
.Fa a
remains valid.
.Pp
If
.Fa a
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer or if neither the object itself nor any of its content
is marked as dynamically allocated, no action occurs.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_new
and
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_create
return a pointer to the new object or
.Dv NULL
if memory allocation fails,
.Sh ERRORS
After failure of
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_new
or
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_create ,
the following diagnostic can be retrieved with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 ,
.Xr ERR_GET_REASON 3 ,
and
.Xr ERR_reason_error_string 3 :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv ERR_R_MALLOC_FAILURE Qq "malloc failure"
Memory allocation failed.
.El
.Pp
After some cases of failure of
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_create ,
the following diagnostic can be retrieved in addition to the above:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv ERR_R_ASN1_LIB Qq "ASN1 lib"
Memory allocation failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr a2d_ASN1_OBJECT 3 ,
.Xr ASN1_TYPE_get 3 ,
.Xr d2i_ASN1_OBJECT 3 ,
.Xr OBJ_create 3 ,
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3
.Sh STANDARDS
ITU-T Recommendation X.208, also known as ISO/IEC 8824-1:
Specification of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1),
section 28: Notation for the object identifier type
.Pp
ITU-T Recommendation X.690, also known as ISO/IEC 8825-1:
Information technology - ASN.1 encoding rules:
Specification of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical Encoding
Rules (CER) and Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER),
section 8.19: Encoding of an object identifier value
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_new
and
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_free
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1 and
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_create
in SSLeay 0.8.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Sh BUGS
The function
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_new
is not useful for any practical purpose because the library does not
provide any function capable of adding data to an existing object.
Consequently, if the application program creates an object with
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_new ,
that object will always remain empty.
.Pp
Similarly, if an
.Fa nid
of
.Dv NID_undef
is passed to
.Fn ASN1_OBJECT_create ,
or if
.Dv NULL
is passed for any of its pointer arguments, the returned object
will permanently remain incomplete.
