.\" $OpenBSD: BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_new.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_new ,
.Nm BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_free
.Nd X.509 extension to mark CA certificates
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509v3.h
.Ft BASIC_CONSTRAINTS *
.Fn BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_new void
.Ft void
.Fn BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_free "BASIC_CONSTRAINTS *bc"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt BASIC_CONSTRAINTS
object, representing an ASN.1
.Vt BasicConstraints
structure defined in RFC 5280 section 4.2.1.9.
.Pp
This object contains two fields.
The field
.Fa "int ca"
is non-zero if the certificate is a CA certificate.
The field
.Fa "ASN1_INTEGER *pathlen"
specifies the maximum number of non-self-issued intermediate
certificates that may follow this certificate in a valid
certification path.
.Pp
If an X.509 version 3 certificate does not contain this extension
or if the
.Fa ca
field of the
.Vt BASIC_CONSTRAINTS
object is 0, or if the certificate contains a key usage extension
having the
.Dv KU_KEY_CERT_SIGN
bit unset, then it is not a CA certificate but an end entity
certificate.
.Pp
.Fn BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_free
frees
.Fa bc .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_new
returns the new
.Vt BASIC_CONSTRAINTS
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_BASIC_CONSTRAINTS 3 ,
.Xr X509_check_purpose 3 ,
.Xr X509_EXTENSION_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_extension_flags 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5280: Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
section 4.2.1.9: Basic Constraints
.It
section 6.1: Basic Path Validation
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_new
and
.Fn BASIC_CONSTRAINTS_free
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.2b and have been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
