.\" $OpenBSD: BIO_s_null.3,v 1.12 2025/07/16 18:10:53 tb Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL e9b77246 Jan 20 19:58:49 2017 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2025 $
.Dt BIO_S_NULL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BIO_s_null
.Nd null data sink
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/bio.h
.Ft const BIO_METHOD *
.Fo BIO_s_null
.Fa void
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn BIO_s_null
returns the null sink BIO method.
Data written to the null sink is discarded, reads return EOF.
.Pp
A null sink BIO behaves in a similar manner to the
.Xr null 4
device.
.Pp
A null BIO can be placed on the end of a chain to discard any data
passed through it.
.Pp
A null sink is useful if, for example, an application wishes
to digest some data by writing through a digest bio
but not send the digested data anywhere.
Since a BIO chain must normally include a source/sink BIO,
this can be achieved by adding a null sink BIO to the end of the chain.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn BIO_s_null
returns the null sink BIO method.
.Pp
When called on a null sink BIO object,
.Xr BIO_method_type 3
returns the constant
.Dv BIO_TYPE_NULL
and
.Xr BIO_method_name 3
returns a pointer to the static string
.Qq NULL ,
not to be confused with a NUL string nor with a
.Dv NULL
pointer.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn BIO_s_null
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
