.\" $OpenBSD: BIO_get_ex_new_index.3,v 1.18 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 61f805c1 Jan 16 01:01:46 2018 +0800
.\"
.\" This file was written by Rich Salz <rsalz@akamai.com>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2015, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt BIO_GET_EX_NEW_INDEX 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BIO_get_ex_new_index ,
.Nm BIO_set_ex_data ,
.Nm BIO_get_ex_data ,
.Nm BIO_set_app_data ,
.Nm BIO_get_app_data ,
.Nm UI_get_ex_new_index ,
.Nm UI_set_ex_data ,
.Nm UI_get_ex_data ,
.Nm X509_get_ex_new_index ,
.Nm X509_set_ex_data ,
.Nm X509_get_ex_data ,
.Nm EC_KEY_get_ex_new_index ,
.Nm EC_KEY_get_ex_data ,
.Nm EC_KEY_set_ex_data
.Nd application-specific data
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/bio.h
.In openssl/ui.h
.In openssl/x509.h
.In openssl/ec.h
.Ft int
.Fo TYPE_get_ex_new_index
.Fa "long argl"
.Fa "void *argp"
.Fa "CRYPTO_EX_new *new_func"
.Fa "CRYPTO_EX_dup *dup_func"
.Fa "CRYPTO_EX_free *free_func"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo TYPE_set_ex_data
.Fa "TYPE *d"
.Fa "int idx"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fc
.Ft void *
.Fo TYPE_get_ex_data
.Fa "TYPE *d"
.Fa "int idx"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo TYPE_set_app_data
.Fa "TYPE *d"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fc
.Ft void *
.Fo TYPE_get_app_data
.Fa "TYPE *d"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
In the description here,
.Vt TYPE
is used a placeholder for any of the OpenSSL datatypes listed in
.Xr CRYPTO_get_ex_new_index 3 .
.Pp
These functions handle application-specific data in OpenSSL data
structures.
Their usage is identical to that of
.Xr RSA_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr RSA_set_ex_data 3 ,
and
.Xr RSA_get_ex_data 3 .
.Pp
.Fn TYPE_get_ex_new_index
is a macro that calls
.Xr CRYPTO_get_ex_new_index 3
with the correct index value.
.Pp
.Fn TYPE_set_ex_data
is a function that calls
.Xr CRYPTO_set_ex_data 3
with an offset into the opaque ex_data part of the
.Vt TYPE
object.
.Pp
.Fn TYPE_get_ex_data
is a function that calls
.Xr CRYPTO_get_ex_data 3
with an offset into the opaque ex_data part of the
.Vt TYPE
object.
.Pp
.Fn TYPE_set_app_data
and
.Fn TYPE_get_app_data
are deprecated wrapper macros that call
.Fn TYPE_set_ex_data
and
.Fn TYPE_get_ex_data
with
.Fa idx
set to 0.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn TYPE_get_new_ex_index
returns a new index on success or \-1 on error.
.Pp
.Fn TYPE_set_ex_data
and
.Fn TYPE_set_app_data
return 1 on success or 0 on error.
.Pp
.Fn TYPE_get_ex_data
and
.Fn TYPE_get_app_data
return the application data or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3 ,
.Xr CRYPTO_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr RSA_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn BIO_set_app_data
and
.Fn BIO_get_app_data
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.1.
.Fn BIO_get_ex_new_index ,
.Fn BIO_set_ex_data ,
and
.Fn BIO_get_ex_data
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_get_ex_new_index ,
.Fn X509_set_ex_data ,
and
.Fn X509_get_ex_data
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5 and have been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
.Pp
.Fn UI_get_ex_new_index ,
.Fn UI_set_ex_data ,
and
.Fn UI_get_ex_data
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Pp
.Fn EC_KEY_get_ex_new_index ,
.Fn EC_KEY_set_ex_data ,
and
.Fn EC_KEY_get_ex_data
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and have been available since
.Ox 6.5 .
