.\"	$OpenBSD: BIO_s_socket.3,v 1.11 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL bbdc9c98 Oct 19 22:02:21 2000 +0000
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt BIO_S_SOCKET 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BIO_s_socket ,
.Nm BIO_new_socket
.Nd socket BIO
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/bio.h
.Ft const BIO_METHOD *
.Fo BIO_s_socket
.Fa void
.Fc
.Ft BIO *
.Fo BIO_new_socket
.Fa "int sock"
.Fa "int close_flag"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn BIO_s_socket
returns the socket BIO method.
This is a wrapper around the platform's socket routines.
.Pp
.Xr BIO_read 3
and
.Xr BIO_write 3
read or write the underlying socket.
.Xr BIO_puts 3
is supported but
.Xr BIO_gets 3
is not.
.Pp
If the close flag is set, then the socket is shut down and closed
when the BIO is freed.
.Pp
.Fn BIO_new_socket
returns a socket BIO using
.Fa sock
and
.Fa close_flag .
.Pp
Socket BIOs also support any relevant functionality of file descriptor BIOs.
.Pp
The reason for having separate file descriptor and socket BIOs
is that on some platforms, sockets are not file descriptors
and use distinct I/O routines.
Windows is one such platform.
Any code mixing the two will not work on all platforms.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn BIO_s_socket
returns the socket BIO method.
.Pp
.Fn BIO_new_socket
returns the newly allocated BIO or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Pp
When called on a socket BIO object,
.Xr BIO_method_type 3
returns the constant
.Dv BIO_TYPE_SOCKET
and
.Xr BIO_method_name 3
returns a pointer to the static string
.Qq socket .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_get_fd 3 ,
.Xr BIO_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn BIO_s_socket
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0.
.Fn BIO_new_socket
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0.
Both functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
