.\" $OpenBSD: BN_num_bytes.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 9e183d22 Mar 11 08:56:44 2017 -0500
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>
.\" and Richard Levitte <levitte@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2004 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt BN_NUM_BYTES 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BN_num_bits_word ,
.Nm BN_num_bits ,
.Nm BN_num_bytes
.Nd get BIGNUM size
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/bn.h
.Ft int
.Fo BN_num_bits_word
.Fa "BN_ULONG w"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo BN_num_bits
.Fa "const BIGNUM *a"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo BN_num_bytes
.Fa "const BIGNUM *a"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn BN_num_bits_word
returns the number of significant bits in
.Fa w ,
that is, the minimum number of digits needed to write
.Fa w
as a binary number.
Except for an argument of 0, this is
.Pp
.D1 floor(log2( Ns Fa w ) ) No + 1 .
.Pp
.Vt BN_ULONG
is a macro that expands to
.Vt unsigned long Pq = Vt uint64_t
on
.Dv _LP64
platforms and
.Vt unsigned int Pq = Vt uint32_t
elsewhere.
.Pp
.Fn BN_num_bits
returns the number of significant bits in the value of the
.Fa "BIGNUM *a" ,
following the same principle as
.Fn BN_num_bits_word .
.Pp
.Fn BN_num_bytes
is a macro that returns the number of significant bytes in
.Fa a ,
i.e. the minimum number of bytes needed to store the value of
.Fa a ,
that is,
.Fn BN_num_bits a
divided by eight and rounded up to the next integer number.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn BN_num_bits_word
returns the number of significant bits in
.Fa w
or 0 if
.Fa w
is 0.
The maximum return value that can occur is
.Dv BN_BITS2 ,
which is 64 on
.Dv _LP64
platforms and 32 elsewhere.
.Pp
.Fn BN_num_bits
returns the number of significant bits and
.Fn BN_num_bytes
the number of significant bytes in
.Fa a ,
or 0 if the value of
.Fa a
is 0.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BN_new 3 ,
.Xr BN_security_bits 3 ,
.Xr DH_size 3 ,
.Xr DSA_size 3 ,
.Xr RSA_size 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn BN_num_bytes
and
.Fn BN_num_bits
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1.
.Fn BN_num_bits_word
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.2.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Sh CAVEATS
Some have tried using
.Fn BN_num_bits
on individual numbers in RSA keys, DH keys and DSA keys, and found that
they don't always come up with the number of bits they expected
(something like 512, 1024, 2048, ...).
This is because generating a number with some specific number of bits
doesn't always set the highest bits, thereby making the number of
.Em significant
bits a little smaller.
If you want to know the "key size" of such a key, use functions like
.Xr RSA_size 3 ,
.Xr DH_size 3 ,
and
.Xr DSA_size 3 .
