.\"	$OpenBSD: BUF_MEM_new.3,v 1.20 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL doc/crypto/buffer.pod 18edda0f Sep 20 03:28:54 2000 +0000
.\"	not merged: 74924dcb, 58e3457a, 21b0fa91, 7644a9ae
.\"	OpenSSL doc/crypto/BUF_MEM_new.pod 53934822 Jun 9 16:39:19 2016 -0400
.\"	not merged: c952780c, 91da5e77
.\"	OpenSSL doc/man3/BUF_MEM_new.pod 498180de Dec 12 15:35:09 2016 +0300
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ralf S. Engelschall <rse@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 1999, 2000, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt BUF_MEM_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BUF_MEM_new ,
.Nm BUF_MEM_free ,
.Nm BUF_MEM_grow ,
.Nm BUF_MEM_grow_clean
.Nd simple character arrays structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/buffer.h
.Ft BUF_MEM *
.Fo BUF_MEM_new
.Fa void
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo BUF_MEM_free
.Fa "BUF_MEM *a"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo BUF_MEM_grow
.Fa "BUF_MEM *str"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo BUF_MEM_grow_clean
.Fa "BUF_MEM *str"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The buffer library handles simple character arrays.
Buffers are used for various purposes in the library, most notably
memory BIOs.
.Pp
The library uses the
.Vt BUF_MEM
structure defined in buffer.h:
.Bd -literal
typedef struct buf_mem_st {
	size_t length;	/* current number of bytes */
	char *data;
	size_t max;	/* size of buffer */
} BUF_MEM;
.Ed
.Pp
.Fa length
is the current size of the buffer in bytes;
.Fa max
is the amount of memory allocated to the buffer.
There are three functions which handle these and one miscellaneous function.
.Pp
.Fn BUF_MEM_new
allocates a new buffer of zero size.
.Pp
.Fn BUF_MEM_free
frees up an already existing buffer.
The data is zeroed before freeing up in case the buffer contains
sensitive data.
If
.Fa a
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, no action occurs.
.Pp
.Fn BUF_MEM_grow
changes the size of an already existing buffer to
.Fa len .
Any data already in the buffer is preserved if it increases in size.
.Pp
.Fn BUF_MEM_grow_clean
is similar to
.Fn BUF_MEM_grow ,
but it sets any freed or additionally allocated memory to zero.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn BUF_MEM_new
returns the buffer or
.Dv NULL
on error.
.Pp
.Fn BUF_MEM_grow
and
.Fn BUF_MEM_grow_clean
return zero on error or the new size (i.e.\&
.Fa len ) .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3 ,
.Xr BIO_s_mem 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn BUF_MEM_new ,
.Fn BUF_MEM_free ,
and
.Fn BUF_MEM_grow
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0.
All these functions  have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn BUF_MEM_grow_clean
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and has been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
