.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_uncompress.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_UNCOMPRESS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_uncompress
.Nd uncompress a CMS CompressedData structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_uncompress
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *cms"
.Fa "BIO *dcont"
.Fa "BIO *out"
.Fa "unsigned int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CMS_uncompress
extracts and uncompresses the content of a CMS
.Vt CompressedData
structure
.Fa cms
and writes it to
.Fa out .
.Pp
In the rare case where the compressed content is detached,
pass it in via
.Fa dcont .
For normal use, set
.Fa dcont
to
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
The only currently supported compression algorithm is zlib: if the
structure indicates the use of any other algorithm, an error is returned.
If zlib support is not compiled in,
.Fn CMS_uncompress
always returns an error.
.Pp
If the
.Dv CMS_TEXT
bit is set in
.Fa flags ,
MIME headers for type text/plain are deleted from the content.
If the content is not of type text/plain, an error is returned.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_uncompress
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
The error can be obtained from
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_compress 3 ,
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 3274: Compressed Data Content Type for Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_uncompress
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h
and has been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
.Sh BUGS
The lack of single pass processing and the need to hold all data in
memory as mentioned in
.Xr CMS_verify 3
also applies to
.Fn CMS_uncompress .
