.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_add1_recipient_cert.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL e9b77246 Jan 20 19:58:49 2017 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_ADD1_RECIPIENT_CERT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_add1_recipient_cert ,
.Nm CMS_add0_recipient_key
.Nd add recipients to a CMS EnvelopedData structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft CMS_RecipientInfo *
.Fo CMS_add1_recipient_cert
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *cms"
.Fa "X509 *certificate"
.Fa "unsigned int flags"
.Fc
.Ft CMS_RecipientInfo *
.Fo CMS_add0_recipient_key
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *cms"
.Fa "int nid"
.Fa "unsigned char *key"
.Fa "size_t keylen"
.Fa "unsigned char *id"
.Fa "size_t idlen"
.Fa "ASN1_GENERALIZEDTIME *date"
.Fa "ASN1_OBJECT *otherTypeId"
.Fa "ASN1_TYPE *otherType"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions add a new
.Vt RecipientInfo
structure to the
.Fa recipientInfos
field of the
.Vt EnvelopedData
structure
.Fa cms ,
which should have been obtained from an initial call to
.Xr CMS_encrypt 3
with the flag
.Dv CMS_PARTIAL
set.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_add1_recipient_cert
adds the recipient
.Fa certificate
as a
.Vt KeyTransRecipientInfo
structure.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_add0_recipient_key
adds the symmetric
.Fa key
of length
.Fa keylen
using the wrapping algorithm
.Fa nid ,
the identifier
.Fa id
of length
.Fa idlen ,
and the optional values
.Fa date ,
.Fa otherTypeId
and
.Fa otherType
as a
.Vt KEKRecipientInfo
structure.
.Pp
The main purpose of these functions is to provide finer control over a CMS
.Vt EnvelopedData
structure where the simpler
.Xr CMS_encrypt 3
function defaults are not appropriate,
for example if one or more
.Vt KEKRecipientInfo
structures need to be added.
New attributes can also be added using the returned
.Vt CMS_RecipientInfo
structure and the CMS attribute utility functions.
.Pp
By default, recipient certificates are identified using issuer
name and serial number.
If the flag
.Dv CMS_USE_KEYID
is set, the subject key identifier value is used instead.
An error occurs if all recipient certificates do not have a subject key
identifier extension.
.Pp
Currently only AES based key wrapping algorithms are supported for
.Fa nid ,
specifically
.Dv NID_id_aes128_wrap ,
.Dv NID_id_aes192_wrap ,
and
.Dv NID_id_aes256_wrap .
If
.Fa nid
is set to
.Dv NID_undef ,
then an AES wrap algorithm will be used consistent with
.Fa keylen .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_add1_recipient_cert
and
.Fn CMS_add0_recipient_key
return an internal pointer to the
.Vt CMS_RecipientInfo
structure just added or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3 ,
.Xr CMS_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr CMS_final 3 ,
.Xr ERR_get_error 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5652: Cryptographic Message Syntax
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
section 6.1: EnvelopedData Type
.It
section 6.2.1: KeyTransRecipientInfo Type
.It
section 6.2.3: KEKRecipientInfo Type
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_add1_recipient_cert
and
.Fn CMS_add0_recipient_key
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h
and have been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
