.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_verify_receipt.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL e9b77246 Jan 20 19:58:49 2017 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_VERIFY_RECEIPT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_verify_receipt
.Nd verify a CMS signed receipt
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_verify_receipt
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *rcms"
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *ocms"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *certs"
.Fa "X509_STORE *store"
.Fa "unsigned int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CMS_verify_receipt
verifies a CMS signed receipt.
.Fa rcms
is the signed receipt to verify.
.Fa ocms
is the original
.Vt SignedData
structure containing the receipt request.
.Fa certs
is a set of certificates in which to search for the signing certificate.
.Fa store
is a trusted certificate store (used for chain verification).
.Pp
This functions behaves in a similar way to
.Xr CMS_verify 3
except that the
.Fa flags
values
.Dv CMS_DETACHED ,
.Dv CMS_BINARY ,
.Dv CMS_TEXT ,
and
.Dv CMS_STREAM
are not supported since they do not make sense in the context of signed
receipts.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_verify_receipt
returns 1 for a successful verification or 0 if an error occurred.
.Pp
The error can be obtained from
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3 ,
.Xr CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest 3 ,
.Xr CMS_sign_receipt 3 ,
.Xr CMS_verify 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 2634: Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME, section 2.8: Receipt Syntax
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_verify_receipt
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h
and has been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
