.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_add1_signer.3,v 1.11 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL e9b77246 Jan 20 19:58:49 2017 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_ADD1_SIGNER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_add1_signer ,
.Nm CMS_SignerInfo_sign
.Nd add a signer to a CMS SignedData structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft CMS_SignerInfo *
.Fo CMS_add1_signer
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *cms"
.Fa "X509 *signcert"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fa "const EVP_MD *md"
.Fa "unsigned int flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_SignerInfo_sign
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CMS_add1_signer
adds a signer with certificate
.Fa signcert
and private key
.Fa pkey
using message digest
.Fa md
to the
.Fa signerInfos
field of the
.Vt SignedData
structure
.Fa cms ,
which should have been obtained from an initial call to
.Xr CMS_sign 3
with the flag
.Dv CMS_PARTIAL
set, or which can be a valid
.Vt SignedData
structure in the case of re-signing.
.Pp
If
.Fa md
is
.Dv NULL ,
the default digest for the public key algorithm of
.Fa pkey
is used.
.Pp
Unless the
.Dv CMS_REUSE_DIGEST
flag is set, the
.Fa cms
structure remains incomplete and must be finalized either by streaming
(if applicable) or by a call to
.Xr CMS_final 3 .
.Pp
The main purpose of
.Fn CMS_add1_signer
is to provide finer control over a CMS
.Vt SignedData
structure where the simpler
.Xr CMS_sign 3
function defaults are not appropriate, for example if multiple signers
or non default digest algorithms are needed.
New attributes can also be added using the returned
.Vt CMS_SignerInfo
structure and the CMS attribute utility functions or the CMS signed
receipt request functions.
.Pp
Any of the following flags (OR'ed together) can be passed in the
.Fa flags
parameter:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv CMS_REUSE_DIGEST
Attempt to copy the content digest value from one of the existing
.Vt CMS_SignerInfo
structures in
.Fa cms
while adding another signer.
An error occurs if a matching digest value cannot be found to copy.
The
.Fa cms
structure will be valid and finalized when this flag is set.
.It Dv CMS_PARTIAL
If this flag is set in addition to
.Dv CMS_REUSE_DIGEST ,
the returned
.Vt CMS_SignerInfo
structure will not be finalized so additional attributes can be added.
In this case an explicit call to
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_sign
is needed to finalize it.
.It Dv CMS_NOCERTS
Do not add the signer's certificate to the
.Fa certificates
field of
.Fa cms .
The signer's certificate must still be supplied in the
.Fa signcert
parameter though.
This flag can reduce the size of the signature if the signer's certificate can
be obtained by other means, for example from a previously signed message.
.It Dv CMS_NOATTR
Leave the
.Fa signedAttrs
field of the returned
.Vt CMS_SignedData
structure empty.
By default, several CMS
.Vt SignedAttributes
are added, including the signing time, the CMS content type,
and the supported list of ciphers in an
.Vt SMIMECapabilities
attribute.
.It Dv CMS_NOSMIMECAP
Omit just the
.Vt SMIMECapabilities
attribute.
.It Dv CMS_USE_KEYID
Use the subject key identifier value to identify signing certificates.
An error occurs if the signing certificate does not have a subject key
identifier extension.
By default, issuer name and serial number are used instead.
.El
.Pp
If present, the
.Vt SMIMECapabilities
attribute indicates support for the
following algorithms in preference order: 256-bit AES,
192-bit AES, 128-bit AES, triple DES, 128-bit RC2, 64-bit
RC2, DES and 40-bit RC2.
If any of these algorithms is not available then it will not be
included.
.Pp
The
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_sign
function explicitly signs
.Fa si .
Its main use is when the
.Dv CMS_REUSE_DIGEST
and
.Dv CMS_PARTIAL
flags were both set in the call to
.Fn CMS_add1_signer
that created
.Fa si .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_add1_signer
returns an internal pointer to the new
.Vt CMS_SignerInfo
structure just added or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3 ,
.Xr CMS_final 3 ,
.Xr CMS_sign 3 ,
.Xr ERR_get_error 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5652: Cryptographic Message Syntax, section 5.1: SignedData Type
.Pp
RFC 8419: Use of Edwards-Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA) Signatures
in the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)
.Pp
RFC 8551: Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME)
Version\ 4.0 Message Specification
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
section 2.5: Attributes and the SignerInfo Type
.It
section 2.5.2: SMIMECapabilities Attribute
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_add1_signer
and
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_sign
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h
and have been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
