.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_final.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 25ccb589 Jul 1 02:02:06 2019 +0800
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_FINAL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_final
.Nd finalise a CMS_ContentInfo structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_final
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *cms"
.Fa "BIO *data"
.Fa "BIO *dcont"
.Fa "unsigned int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CMS_final
finalises the structure
.Fa cms .
Its purpose is to perform any operations necessary on
.Fa cms
(digest computation for example) and set the appropriate fields.
The parameter
.Fa data
contains the content to be processed.
The
.Fa dcont
parameter contains a
.Vt BIO
to write content to after processing: this is
only used with detached data and will usually be set to
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
This function will normally be called when the
.Dv CMS_PARTIAL
flag is used.
It should only be used when streaming is not performed because the
streaming I/O functions perform finalisation operations internally.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_final
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3 ,
.Xr CMS_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr CMS_sign 3 ,
.Xr ERR_get_error 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_final
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h
and has been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
