.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_sign_receipt.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL e9b77246 Jan 20 19:58:49 2017 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_SIGN_RECEIPT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_sign_receipt
.Nd create a CMS signed receipt
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft CMS_ContentInfo *
.Fo CMS_sign_receipt
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fa "X509 *signcert"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *certs"
.Fa "unsigned int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CMS_sign_receipt
creates a new CMS
.Vt SignedData
structure containing a signed
.Vt Receipt
as its embedded content.
.Fa si
is the
.Vt SignerInfo
structure containing the signed receipt request.
.Fa signcert
is the certificate to sign with,
.Fa pkey
is the corresponding private key.
.Fa certs
is an optional additional set of certificates to include in the CMS
structure (for example any intermediate CAs in the chain).
.Pp
This functions behaves in a similar way to
.Xr CMS_sign 3
except that the
.Fa flags
values
.Dv CMS_DETACHED ,
.Dv CMS_BINARY ,
.Dv CMS_NOATTR ,
.Dv CMS_TEXT ,
and
.Dv CMS_STREAM
are not supported since they do not make sense in the context of
signed receipts.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_sign_receipt
returns either a valid
.Vt CMS_ContentInfo
structure or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
The error can be obtained from
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3 ,
.Xr CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest 3 ,
.Xr CMS_sign 3 ,
.Xr CMS_verify_receipt 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 2634: Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME, section 2.8: Receipt Syntax
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_sign_receipt
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h
and has been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
