.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 83cf7abf May 29 13:07:08 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_GET1_RECEIPTREQUEST 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_ReceiptRequest_create0 ,
.Nm CMS_add1_ReceiptRequest ,
.Nm CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest ,
.Nm CMS_ReceiptRequest_get0_values
.Nd CMS signed receipt request functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft CMS_ReceiptRequest *
.Fo CMS_ReceiptRequest_create0
.Fa "unsigned char *id"
.Fa "int idlen"
.Fa "int allorfirst"
.Fa "STACK_OF(GENERAL_NAMES) *receiptList"
.Fa "STACK_OF(GENERAL_NAMES) *receiptsTo"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_add1_ReceiptRequest
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fa "CMS_ReceiptRequest *rr"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fa "CMS_ReceiptRequest **prr"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo CMS_ReceiptRequest_get0_values
.Fa "CMS_ReceiptRequest *rr"
.Fa "ASN1_STRING **pcid"
.Fa "int *pallorfirst"
.Fa "STACK_OF(GENERAL_NAMES) **plist"
.Fa "STACK_OF(GENERAL_NAMES) **prto"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CMS_ReceiptRequest_create0
creates a new
.Vt ReceiptRequest
structure.
The
.Fa signedContentIdentifier
field is set using
.Fa id
and
.Fa idlen ,
or it is set to 32 bytes of pseudo random data if
.Fa id
is
.Dv NULL .
If
.Fa receiptList
is
.Dv NULL ,
the
.Fa allOrFirstTier
option in the
.Fa receiptsFrom
field is set to the value of the
.Fa allorfirst
argument.
If
.Fa receiptList
is not
.Dv NULL ,
the
.Fa receiptList
option in the
.Fa receiptsFrom
field is used.
The
.Fa receiptsTo
argument specifies the value of the
.Fa receiptsTo
field.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_add1_ReceiptRequest
adds a BER-encoded copy of
.Fa rr
to
.Fa si .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest
looks for a signed receipt request in
.Fa si .
If any is found, it is decoded and written to
.Fa prr .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_ReceiptRequest_get0_values
retrieves the values of a receipt request.
The
.Fa signedContentIdentifier
is copied to
.Fa pcid .
If the
.Fa allOrFirstTier
option is used in the
.Fa receiptsFrom
field, its value is copied to
.Fa pallorfirst ;
otherwise the
.Fa receiptList
field is copied to
.Fa plist .
The
.Fa receiptsTo
field is copied to
.Fa prto .
.Pp
The contents of a signed receipt should only be considered meaningful if
the corresponding
.Vt CMS_ContentInfo
structure can be successfully verified using
.Xr CMS_verify 3 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_ReceiptRequest_create0
returns the new signed receipt request structure or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_add1_ReceiptRequest
returns 1 for success or 0 if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest
returns 1 is a signed receipt request is found and decoded.
It returns 0 if a signed receipt request is not present or -1 if it is
present but malformed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3 ,
.Xr CMS_sign 3 ,
.Xr CMS_sign_receipt 3 ,
.Xr CMS_verify 3 ,
.Xr CMS_verify_receipt 3 ,
.Xr ERR_get_error 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 2634: Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME,
section 2.7: Receipt Request Syntax
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_ReceiptRequest_create0 ,
.Fn CMS_add1_ReceiptRequest ,
.Fn CMS_get1_ReceiptRequest ,
and
.Fn CMS_ReceiptRequest_get0_values
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h
and have been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
