.\" $OpenBSD: CMS_get0_SignerInfos.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 83cf7abf May 29 13:07:08 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2008, 2013 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CMS_GET0_SIGNERINFOS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CMS_get0_SignerInfos ,
.Nm CMS_SignerInfo_get_version ,
.Nm CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signer_id ,
.Nm CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signature ,
.Nm CMS_SignerInfo_cert_cmp ,
.Nm CMS_SignerInfo_set1_signer_cert
.Nd CMS SignedData signer functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/cms.h
.Ft STACK_OF(CMS_SignerInfo) *
.Fo CMS_get0_SignerInfos
.Fa "CMS_ContentInfo *cms"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_SignerInfo_get_version
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fa "long *version"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signer_id
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fa "ASN1_OCTET_STRING **keyid"
.Fa "X509_NAME **issuer"
.Fa "ASN1_INTEGER **sno"
.Fc
.Ft ASN1_OCTET_STRING *
.Fo CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signature
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo CMS_SignerInfo_cert_cmp
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fa "X509 *certificate"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo CMS_SignerInfo_set1_signer_cert
.Fa "CMS_SignerInfo *si"
.Fa "X509 *signer"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CMS_get0_SignerInfos
returns all the
.Vt SignerInfo
structures associated with the
.Vt SignedData
structure
.Fa cms .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get_version
sets
.Pf * Fa version
to the syntax version number of the
.Vt SignerInfo
structure
.Fa si .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signer_id
retrieves the certificate
.Vt SignerIdentifier
associated with the
.Vt SignerInfo
structure
.Fa si .
Either the
.Vt SubjectKeyIdentifier
will be set in
.Fa keyid
or both issuer name and serial number in
.Fa issuer
and
.Fa sno .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signature
retrieves the
.Fa signature
field of
.Fa si .
The application program is allowed to modify the data pointed to.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_cert_cmp
compares the
.Fa certificate
against the signer identifier of
.Fa si .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_set1_signer_cert
sets the signer certificate of
.Fa si
to
.Fa signer .
.Pp
The main purpose of these functions is to enable an application to
look up signer certificates using any appropriate technique when the
simpler method of
.Xr CMS_verify 3
is not appropriate.
.Pp
In typical usage, an application retrieves all
.Vt CMS_SignerInfo
structures using
.Fn CMS_get0_SignerInfos
and retrieves the identifier information using CMS.
It will then obtain the signer certificate by some unspecified means
(or return and error if it cannot be found) and set it using
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_set1_signer_cert .
Once all signer certificates have been set,
.Xr CMS_verify 3
can be used.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn CMS_get0_SignerInfos
returns an internal pointer to all the
.Vt CMS_SignerInfo
structures, or
.Dv NULL
if there are no signers or if
.Fa cms
is not of the type
.Vt SignedData .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get_version
always succeeds and returns 1.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signer_id
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signature
returns an internal pointer to the signature.
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_cert_cmp
returns 0 for a match or non-zero otherwise.
.Pp
Any error can be obtained from
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CMS_ContentInfo_new 3 ,
.Xr CMS_signed_add1_attr 3 ,
.Xr CMS_verify 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5652: Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
section 5.1: SignedData Type
.It
section 5.3: SignerInfo Type
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CMS_get0_SignerInfos ,
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signer_id ,
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_cert_cmp ,
and
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_set1_signer_cert
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h and
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get0_signature
in OpenSSL 1.0.2.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 6.7 .
.Pp
.Fn CMS_SignerInfo_get_version
first appeared in
.Ox 7.4 .
