.\"	$OpenBSD: CONF_modules_free.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL a528d4f0 Oct 27 13:40:11 2015 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, 2006 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt CONF_MODULES_FREE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CONF_modules_free ,
.Nm CONF_modules_finish ,
.Nm CONF_modules_unload
.Nd OpenSSL configuration cleanup functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/conf.h
.Ft void
.Fo CONF_modules_free
.Fa void
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo CONF_modules_finish
.Fa void
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo CONF_modules_unload
.Fa "int all"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn CONF_modules_free
closes down and frees up all memory allocated by all configuration
modules.
Normally applications will only call this function
at application exit to tidy up any configuration performed.
.Pp
.Fn CONF_modules_finish
calls the configuration
.Sy finish
handler of each configuration module to free up any configuration
that module may have performed.
.Pp
.Fn CONF_modules_unload
finishes and unloads configuration modules.
If
.Fa all
is set to 1, the builtin modules will be unloaded as well.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CONF_modules_load_file 3 ,
.Xr OPENSSL_config 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn CONF_modules_free ,
.Fn CONF_modules_finish ,
and
.Fn CONF_modules_unload
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
