.\" $OpenBSD: d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio.3,v 1.12 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 61f805c1 Jan 16 01:01:46 2018 +0800
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2016, 2017 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt D2I_PKCS8PRIVATEKEY_BIO 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio ,
.Nm d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_fp ,
.Nm i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio ,
.Nm i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_fp ,
.Nm i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_nid_bio ,
.Nm i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_nid_fp
.Nd PKCS#8 format private key functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft EVP_PKEY *
.Fo d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY **x"
.Fa "pem_password_cb *cb"
.Fa "void *u"
.Fc
.Ft EVP_PKEY *
.Fo d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY **x"
.Fa "pem_password_cb *cb"
.Fa "void *u"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *x"
.Fa "const EVP_CIPHER *enc"
.Fa "char *kstr"
.Fa "int klen"
.Fa "pem_password_cb *cb"
.Fa "void *u"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *x"
.Fa "const EVP_CIPHER *enc"
.Fa "char *kstr"
.Fa "int klen"
.Fa "pem_password_cb *cb"
.Fa "void *u"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_nid_bio
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *x"
.Fa "int nid"
.Fa "char *kstr"
.Fa "int klen"
.Fa "pem_password_cb *cb"
.Fa "void *u"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_nid_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *x"
.Fa "int nid"
.Fa "char *kstr"
.Fa "int klen"
.Fa "pem_password_cb *cb"
.Fa "void *u"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The PKCS#8 functions encode and decode private keys in PKCS#8 format
using both PKCS#5 v1.5 and PKCS#5 v2.0 password based encryption
algorithms.
.Pp
Other than the use of DER as opposed to PEM these functions are
identical to the corresponding functions described in
.Xr PEM_read_PrivateKey 3 .
.Pp
These functions are currently the only way to store encrypted private
keys using DER format.
.Pp
Currently all the functions use
.Vt BIO
or
.Vt FILE
pointers.
There are no functions which work directly on memory,
though this can be readily worked around
by converting the buffers to memory BIOs;
see
.Xr BIO_s_mem 3
for details.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio
and
.Fn d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_fp
return a
.Vt EVP_PKEY
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Pp
.Fn i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio ,
.Fn i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_fp ,
.Fn i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_nid_bio ,
and
.Fn i2d_PKCS8PrivateKey_nid_fp
return 1 on success or 0 on error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_X509_SIG 3 ,
.Xr PEM_write_PKCS8PrivateKey 3 ,
.Xr PKCS8_PRIV_KEY_INFO_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5
and have been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
.Sh CAVEATS
Do not confuse these functions with
.Xr i2d_PKCS8PrivateKeyInfo_bio 3
and
.Xr i2d_PKCS8PrivateKeyInfo_fp 3 ,
which write out private keys in
.Sy unencrypted
DER format.
