.\" $OpenBSD: des_read_pw.3,v 1.13 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL doc/crypto/des.pod
.\" 53934822 Jun 9 16:39:19 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt DES_READ_PW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_read_pw_string ,
.Nm EVP_read_pw_string_min ,
.Nm EVP_set_pw_prompt ,
.Nm EVP_get_pw_prompt
.Nd compatibility user interface functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_read_pw_string
.Fa "char *buf"
.Fa "int length"
.Fa "const char *prompt"
.Fa "int verify"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_read_pw_string_min
.Fa "char *buf"
.Fa "int min_length"
.Fa "int length"
.Fa "const char *prompt"
.Fa "int verify"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo EVP_set_pw_prompt
.Fa "const char *default_prompt"
.Fc
.Ft char *
.Fn EVP_get_pw_prompt void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string
writes the
.Fa prompt
to
.Pa /dev/tty ,
or, if that could not be opened, to standard output, turns echo off,
and reads an input string from
.Pa /dev/tty ,
or, if that could not be opened, from standard input.
The string is returned in
.Fa buf ,
which must have space for at least
.Fa length
bytes.
If the
.Fa length
argument exceeds
.Dv BUFSIZ ,
.Dv BUFSIZ
is used instead.
If
.Fa verify
is set, the user is asked for the password twice and unless the two
copies match, an error is returned.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string_min
additionally checks that the password is at least
.Fa min_length
bytes long.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_set_pw_prompt
sets a default prompt to a copy of
.Fa default_prompt ,
or clears the default prompt if the
.Fa default_prompt
argument is
.Dv NULL
or an empty string.
If the
.Fa default_prompt
argument is longer than 79 bytes,
the copy is silently truncated to a string length of 79 bytes.
.Pp
As long as a default prompt is set,
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string
and
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string_min
can be called with a
.Fa prompt
argument of
.Dv NULL ,
in which case the default prompt is used instead.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string
and
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string_min
return 0 on success or a negative value on failure.
.Pp
They return \-1 if
.Fa length
is less than or equal to zero or on memory allocation failure.
They return \-1 or \-2 if the internal call to
.Xr UI_process 3
fails.
.Pp
In addition,
.Fa EVP_read_pw_string_min
returns \-1 if
.Fa min_length
is negative, if
.Fa length
is less than or equal to
.Fa min_length ,
or if the user entered a password shorter than
.Fa min_length .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_get_pw_prompt
returns an internal pointer to static memory containing the default prompt, or
.Dv NULL
if no default prompt is set.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr UI_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1 and
.Fn EVP_set_pw_prompt
and
.Fn EVP_get_pw_prompt
in SSLeay 0.6.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_read_pw_string_min
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0
and has been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
