.\" $OpenBSD: DSA_meth_new.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL c4d3c19b Apr 3 13:57:12 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018, 2022 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Matt Caswell <matt@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt DSA_METH_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm DSA_meth_new ,
.Nm DSA_meth_free ,
.Nm DSA_meth_dup ,
.Nm DSA_meth_get0_name ,
.Nm DSA_meth_set1_name ,
.Nm DSA_meth_set_sign ,
.Nm DSA_meth_set_finish
.Nd build up DSA methods
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/dsa.h
.Ft DSA_METHOD *
.Fo DSA_meth_new
.Fa "const char *name"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo DSA_meth_free
.Fa "DSA_METHOD *meth"
.Fc
.Ft DSA_METHOD *
.Fo DSA_meth_dup
.Fa "const DSA_METHOD *meth"
.Fc
.Ft const char *
.Fo DSA_meth_get0_name
.Fa "const DSA_METHOD *meth"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo DSA_meth_set1_name
.Fa "DSA_METHOD *meth"
.Fa "const char *name"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo DSA_meth_set_sign
.Fa "DSA_METHOD *meth"
.Fa "DSA_SIG *(*sign)(const unsigned char *, int, DSA *)"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo DSA_meth_set_finish
.Fa "DSA_METHOD *meth"
.Fa "int (*finish)(DSA *)"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Vt DSA_METHOD
structure holds function pointers for custom DSA implementations.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_new
creates a new
.Vt DSA_METHOD
structure.
A copy of the NUL-terminated
.Fa name
is stored in the new
.Vt DSA_METHOD
object.
Any new
.Vt DSA
object constructed from this
.Vt DSA_METHOD
will have the given
.Fa flags
set by default.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_dup
creates a deep copy of
.Fa meth .
This might be useful for creating a new
.Vt DSA_METHOD
based on an existing one, but with some differences.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_free
destroys
.Fa meth
and frees any memory associated with it.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_get0_name
returns an internal pointer to the name of
.Fa meth .
.Fn DSA_meth_set1_name
stores a copy of the NUL-terminated
.Fa name
in
.Fa meth
after freeing the previously stored name.
Method names are ignored by the default DSA implementation but can be
used by alternative implementations and by the application program.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_set_sign
sets the function used for creating a DSA signature.
This function will be called from
.Xr DSA_do_sign 3
and indirectly from
.Xr DSA_sign 3 .
The parameters of
.Fa sign
have the same meaning as for
.Xr DSA_do_sign 3 .
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_set_finish
sets an optional function for destroying a
.Vt DSA
object.
Unless
.Fa finish
is
.Dv NULL ,
it will be called from
.Xr DSA_free 3 .
It takes the same argument
and is intended to do DSA implementation specific cleanup.
The memory used by the
.Vt DSA
object itself should not be freed by the
.Fa finish
function.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn DSA_meth_new
and
.Fn DSA_meth_dup
return the newly allocated
.Vt DSA_METHOD
object or
.Dv NULL
on failure.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_get0_name
returns an internal pointer which must not be freed by the caller.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_set1_name
and all
.Fn DSA_meth_set_*
functions return 1 on success or 0 on failure.
In the current implementation, only
.Fn DSA_meth_set1_name
can actually fail.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr DSA_do_sign 3 ,
.Xr DSA_new 3 ,
.Xr DSA_set_method 3 ,
.Xr DSA_SIG_new 3 ,
.Xr DSA_sign 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_new ,
.Fn DSA_meth_free ,
.Fn DSA_meth_dup ,
.Fn DSA_meth_set_sign ,
and
.Fn DSA_meth_set_finish
have been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
.Pp
.Fn DSA_meth_get0_name
and
.Fn DSA_meth_set1_name
have been available since
.Ox 7.2 .
