.\"	$OpenBSD: ERR_GET_LIB.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL doc/man3/ERR_GET_LIB.pod 3dfda1a6 Dec 12 11:14:40 2016 -0500
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt ERR_GET_LIB 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ERR_GET_LIB ,
.Nm ERR_GET_FUNC ,
.Nm ERR_GET_REASON ,
.Nm ERR_FATAL_ERROR
.Nd get library, function and reason codes for OpenSSL errors
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/err.h
.Ft int
.Fo ERR_GET_LIB
.Fa "unsigned long e"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo ERR_GET_FUNC
.Fa "unsigned long e"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo ERR_GET_REASON
.Fa "unsigned long e"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo ERR_FATAL_ERROR
.Fa "unsigned long e"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The error code returned by
.Xr ERR_get_error 3
consists of a library number, function code, and reason code.
.Fn ERR_GET_LIB ,
.Fn ERR_GET_FUNC ,
and
.Fn ERR_GET_REASON
can be used to extract these.
.Pp
The library number and function code describe where the error occurred,
whereas the reason code is the information about what went wrong.
.Pp
Each sub-library of OpenSSL has a unique library number; function and
reason codes are unique within each sub-library.
Note that different libraries may use the same value to signal different
functions and reasons.
.Pp
.Dv ERR_R_*
reason codes such as
.Dv ERR_R_MALLOC_FAILURE
are globally unique.
However, when checking for sub-library specific reason codes, be sure to
also compare the library number.
.Pp
.Fn ERR_FATAL_ERROR
indicates whether a given error code is a fatal error.
.Pp
These functions are implemented as macros.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn ERR_GET_LIB ,
.Fn ERR_GET_FUNC ,
and
.Fn ERR_GET_REASON
return the library number, function code, and reason code, respectively.
.Pp
.Fn ERR_FATAL_ERROR
returns non-zero if the error is fatal or 0 otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ERR 3 ,
.Xr ERR_get_error 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn ERR_GET_LIB ,
.Fn ERR_GET_FUNC ,
.Fn ERR_GET_REASON ,
and
.Fn ERR_FATAL_ERROR
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.4 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
