.\"	$OpenBSD: ERR_print_errors.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>,
.\" with additions by Rich Salz <rsalz@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt ERR_PRINT_ERRORS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ERR_print_errors ,
.Nm ERR_print_errors_fp ,
.Nm ERR_print_errors_cb
.Nd print OpenSSL error messages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/err.h
.Ft void
.Fo ERR_print_errors
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ERR_print_errors_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ERR_print_errors_cb
.Fa "int (*cb)(const char *str, size_t len, void *u)"
.Fa "void *u"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn ERR_print_errors
is a convenience function that prints the error strings for all errors
that OpenSSL has recorded to
.Fa bp ,
thus emptying the error queue.
.Pp
.Fn ERR_print_errors_fp
is the same, except that the output goes to a
.Vt FILE .
.Pp
.Fn ERR_print_errors_cb
is the same, except that the callback function,
.Fa cb ,
is called for each error line with the string, length, and userdata
.Fa u
as the callback parameters.
.Pp
The error strings have the following format:
.Bd -literal
[pid]:error:[error code]:[library name]:[function name]:[reason string]:
[file name]:[line]:[optional text message]
.Ed
.Pp
The error code is an 8-digit hexadecimal number.
The library name, the function name, and the reason string are ASCII
text, as is the optional text message if one was set for the
respective error code.
.Pp
If there is no text string registered for the given error code, the
error string will contain the numeric code.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ERR 3 ,
.Xr ERR_error_string 3 ,
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 ,
.Xr ERR_load_crypto_strings 3 ,
.Xr SSL_load_error_strings 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn ERR_print_errors
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.5.
.Fn ERR_print_errors_fp
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0.
Both functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn ERR_print_errors_cb
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and has been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
