.\"	$OpenBSD: ERR_load_strings.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 05ea606a May 20 20:52:46 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt ERR_LOAD_STRINGS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ERR_load_strings ,
.Nm ERR_PACK ,
.Nm ERR_get_next_error_library
.Nd load arbitrary OpenSSL error strings
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/err.h
.Ft void
.Fo ERR_load_strings
.Fa "int lib"
.Fa "ERR_STRING_DATA str[]"
.Fc
.Ft unsigned long
.Fo ERR_PACK
.Fa "int lib"
.Fa "int func"
.Fa "int reason"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn ERR_get_next_error_library void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn ERR_load_strings
registers error strings for library number
.Fa lib .
.Pp
.Fa str
is an array of error string data:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef struct ERR_string_data_st {
        unsigned long error;
        char *string;
} ERR_STRING_DATA;
.Ed
.Pp
The error code is generated from the library number and a function and
reason code:
.Pp
.Dl error = ERR_PACK(lib, func, reason)
.Pp
.Fn ERR_PACK
is a macro.
.Pp
The last entry in the array is
.Brq 0 , Dv NULL .
.Pp
.Fn ERR_get_next_error_library
can be used to assign library numbers to user libraries at runtime.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn ERR_PACK
returns the error code.
.Fn ERR_get_next_error_library
returns a new library number.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ERR 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn ERR_load_strings
and
.Fn ERR_PACK
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.4.
.Fn ERR_get_next_error_library
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
