.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_sha3_224.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL bbda8ce9 Oct 31 15:43:01 2017 +0800
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ronald Tse <ronald.tse@ribose.com>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_SHA3_224 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_sha3_224 ,
.Nm EVP_sha3_256 ,
.Nm EVP_sha3_384 ,
.Nm EVP_sha3_512
.Nd Secure Hash Algorithm 3 for EVP
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_sha3_224 void
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_sha3_256 void
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_sha3_384 void
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_sha3_512 void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
SHA-3 (Secure Hash Algorithm 3) is a family of cryptographic hash
functions standardized in NIST FIPS 202, first published in 2015.
It is based on the Keccak algorithm.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_sha3_224 ,
.Fn EVP_sha3_256 ,
.Fn EVP_sha3_384 ,
and
.Fn EVP_sha3_512
implement the SHA3-224, SHA3-256, SHA3-384, and SHA3-512 algorithms
and produce 224, 256, 384 and 512 bits of output from a given input,
respectively.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return pointers to static
.Vt EVP_MD
objects implementing the hash functions.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr evp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3
.Sh STANDARDS
NIST FIPS 202
