.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_rc4.3,v 1.2 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 8fa4d95e Oct 21 11:59:09 2017 +0900
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ronald Tse <ronald.tse@ribose.com>
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_RC4 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_rc4 ,
.Nm EVP_rc4_40 ,
.Nm EVP_rc4_hmac_md5
.Nd EVP RC4 stream cipher
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft const EVP_CIPHER *
.Fn EVP_rc4 void
.Ft const EVP_CIPHER *
.Fn EVP_rc4_40 void
.Ft const EVP_CIPHER *
.Fn EVP_rc4_hmac_md5 void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions provide the RC4 stream cipher in the
.Xr evp 3
framework.
It is a variable key length cipher.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_rc4
uses a default key length of 128 bits.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_rc4_40
uses a key length of 40 bits instead.
This function is deprecated.
Use
.Fn EVP_rc4
and
.Xr EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_key_length 3
instead.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_rc4_hmac_md5
provides authenticated encryption with the RC4 stream cipher
with MD5 as HMAC.
This function is not intended for usage outside of TLS
and requires calling of some undocumented control functions.
It does not conform to the EVP AEAD interface.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return an
.Vt EVP_CIPHER
structure that provides the implementation of the symmetric cipher.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr evp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_EncryptInit 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_rc4
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1
and
.Fn EVP_rc4_40
in OpenSSL 0.9.1.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_rc4_hmac_md5
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.1 and has been available since
.Ox 5.3 .
