.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_PKEY_get_default_digest_nid.3,v 1.11 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL df75c2bf Dec 9 01:02:36 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2006, 2009, 2013, 2018 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_PKEY_GET_DEFAULT_DIGEST_NID 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_PKEY_get_default_digest_nid
.Nd get default signature digest
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_get_default_digest_nid
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fa "int *pnid"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn EVP_PKEY_get_default_digest_nid
function sets
.Pf * Fa pnid
to the default message digest NID for the public key signature
operations associated with
.Fa pkey .
.Pp
Some signature algorithms, for example
.Dv EVP_PKEY_ED25519 ,
do not use a digest during signing.
In this case,
.Pf * Fa pnid
is set to
.Dv NID_undef .
.Pp
Support for the following public key algorithms is built into the library:
.Pp
.Bl -column -compact EVP_PKEY_base_id(3) NID_sha256 mandatory
.It Xr EVP_PKEY_base_id 3 Ta Pf * Fa pnid               Ta return value
.It Dv EVP_PKEY_DSA       Ta Dv NID_sha1                Ta mandatory
.It Dv EVP_PKEY_EC        Ta Dv NID_sha1                Ta mandatory
.It Dv EVP_PKEY_ED25519   Ta Dv NID_undef               Ta mandatory
.It Dv EVP_PKEY_HMAC      Ta Dv NID_sha1                Ta advisory
.It Dv EVP_PKEY_RSA       Ta Dv NID_sha256              Ta advisory
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn EVP_PKEY_get_default_digest_nid
function returns 1 if the message digest is advisory (that is other
digests can be used) and 2 if it is mandatory (other digests cannot be
used).
It returns 0 or a negative value for failure.
In particular, a return value of -2 indicates the operation is not
supported by the public key algorithm.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr EVP_PKEY_CTX_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_CTX_new 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_new 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_sign 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_verify 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_verify_recover 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_PKEY_get_default_digest_nid
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and has been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
