.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_VerifyInit.3,v 1.14 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 24a535ea Sep 22 13:14:20 2020 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2001, 2006, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_VERIFYINIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_VerifyInit_ex ,
.Nm EVP_VerifyUpdate ,
.Nm EVP_VerifyFinal ,
.Nm EVP_VerifyInit
.Nd EVP signature verification functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_VerifyInit_ex
.Fa "EVP_MD_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "const EVP_MD *type"
.Fa "ENGINE *engine"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_VerifyUpdate
.Fa "EVP_MD_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "const void *d"
.Fa "unsigned int cnt"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_VerifyFinal
.Fa "EVP_MD_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "unsigned char *sigbuf"
.Fa "unsigned int siglen"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_VerifyInit
.Fa "EVP_MD_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "const EVP_MD *type"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The EVP signature verification routines are a high-level interface to
digital signatures.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_VerifyInit_ex
sets up the verification context
.Fa ctx
to use the digest
.Fa type .
Before calling this function, obtain
.Fa ctx
from
.Xr EVP_MD_CTX_new 3
or call
.Xr EVP_MD_CTX_reset 3
on it.
The
.Fa engine
argument is always ignored and passing
.Dv NULL
is recommended.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_VerifyUpdate
hashes
.Fa cnt
bytes of data at
.Fa d
into the verification context
.Fa ctx .
This function can be called several times on the same
.Fa ctx
to include additional data.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_VerifyFinal
verifies the data in
.Fa ctx
using the public key
.Fa pkey
and against the
.Fa siglen
bytes at
.Fa sigbuf .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_VerifyInit
initializes a verification context
.Fa ctx
to use the default implementation of digest
.Fa type .
.Pp
The EVP interface to digital signatures should almost always be
used in preference to the low-level interfaces.
This is because the code then becomes transparent to the algorithm used
and much more flexible.
.Pp
The call to
.Fn EVP_VerifyFinal
internally finalizes a copy of the digest context.
This means that calls to
.Fn EVP_VerifyUpdate
and
.Fn EVP_VerifyFinal
can be called later to digest and verify additional data.
.Pp
Since only a copy of the digest context is ever finalized, the context
must be cleaned up after use by calling
.Xr EVP_MD_CTX_free 3 ,
or a memory leak will occur.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_VerifyInit_ex ,
.Fn EVP_VerifyUpdate ,
and
.Fn EVP_VerifyInit
are implemented as macros.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn EVP_VerifyInit_ex
and
.Fn EVP_VerifyUpdate
return 1 for success and 0 for failure.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_VerifyFinal
returns 1 for a correct signature, 0 for failure, and -1 if some other
error occurred.
.Pp
The error codes can be obtained by
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr evp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3 ,
.Xr EVP_SignInit 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_VerifyInit ,
.Fn EVP_VerifyUpdate ,
and
.Fn EVP_VerifyFinal
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_VerifyInit_ex
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and has been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Sh BUGS
Older versions of this documentation wrongly stated that calls to
.Fn EVP_VerifyUpdate
could not be made after calling
.Fn EVP_VerifyFinal .
.Pp
Since the public key is passed in the call to
.Xr EVP_SignFinal 3 ,
any error relating to the private key (for example an unsuitable key and
digest combination) will not be indicated until after potentially large
amounts of data have been passed through
.Xr EVP_SignUpdate 3 .
.Pp
It is not possible to change the signing parameters using these
functions.
.Pp
The previous two bugs are fixed in the newer functions of the
.Xr EVP_DigestVerifyInit 3
family.
