.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_PKEY_asn1_get_count.3,v 1.11 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 72a7a702 Feb 26 14:05:09 2019 +0000
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020, 2023 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Richard Levitte <levitte@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_PKEY_ASN1_GET_COUNT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_PKEY_asn1_get_count ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0 ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_get0_asn1 ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_asn1_find ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_asn1_find_str ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0_info
.Nd enumerate public key ASN.1 methods
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft int
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get_count void
.Ft const EVP_PKEY_ASN1_METHOD *
.Fo EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0
.Fa "int idx"
.Fc
.Ft const EVP_PKEY_ASN1_METHOD *
.Fo EVP_PKEY_get0_asn1
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Ft const EVP_PKEY_ASN1_METHOD *
.Fo EVP_PKEY_asn1_find
.Fa "ENGINE **engine"
.Fa "int type"
.Fc
.Ft const EVP_PKEY_ASN1_METHOD *
.Fo EVP_PKEY_asn1_find_str
.Fa "ENGINE **engine"
.Fa "const char *str"
.Fa "int len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0_info
.Fa "int *ppkey_id"
.Fa "int *pkey_base_id"
.Fa "int *ppkey_flags"
.Fa "const char **pinfo"
.Fa "const char **ppem_str"
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY_ASN1_METHOD *ameth"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get_count
returns the number of public key ASN.1 methods available.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0
returns the public key ASN.1 method
.Fa idx .
The value of
.Fa idx
must be in the range from zero to
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get_count
\- 1.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_find
looks up the method with NID
.Fa type ,
which can be any of the values that
.Xr EVP_PKEY_base_id 3
and
.Xr EVP_PKEY_id 3
may return.
If
.Fa engine
is not
.Dv NULL ,
.Pf * Fa engine
is set to
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_find_str
looks up the method with the PEM type string given by the first
.Fa len
bytes of
.Fa str .
If
.Fa len
is \-1, the
.Xr strlen 3
of
.Fa str
is used instead.
The PEM type strings supported by default are listed in the
.Xr EVP_PKEY_base_id 3
manual page.
Just like
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_find ,
if
.Fa engine
is not
.Dv NULL ,
.Pf * Fa engine
is set to
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0_info
retrieves the public key ID as returned by
.Xr EVP_PKEY_id 3 ,
the base public key ID as returned by
.Xr EVP_PKEY_base_id 3
.Pq both NIDs ,
any flags, and internal pointers owned by
.Fa ameth
pointing to its method description string and its PEM type string.
.Pp
The following flags bits can occur, OR'ed together in
.Pf * Fa ppkey_flags :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv ASN1_PKEY_ALIAS
This
.Fa ameth
object serves as an alias for another
.Vt EVP_PKEY_ASN1_METHOD
object and will never be returned from
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_find
or
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_find_str .
.It Dv ASN1_PKEY_DYNAMIC
This flag is unused.
It could formerly be used to mark an
.Fa ameth
object as dynamically allocated.
.It Dv ASN1_PKEY_SIGPARAM_NULL
If the signing
.Fa ctx
uses an
.Vt EVP_PKEY
private key associated with this
.Fa ameth ,
instruct
.Xr ASN1_item_sign_ctx 3
to use a parameter type of
.Dv V_ASN1_NULL
instead of the default
.Dv V_ASN1_UNDEF
when encoding the ASN.1
.Vt AlgorithmIdentifier
objects with
.Xr X509_ALGOR_set0 3 .
In particular, this is used for
.Dv EVP_PKEY_RSA .
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get_count
returns the number of available public key methods.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0
returns a public key method or
.Dv NULL
if
.Fa idx
is out of range.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_get0_asn1
returns the public key method used by
.Fa pkey .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_find
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_find_str
return a matching public key method or
.Dv NULL
if no match is found.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_asn1_get0_info
returns 1 on success or 0 on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr EVP_PKEY_base_id 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0
and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
