.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_aes_128_gcm.3,v 1.3 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to:
.\" OpenSSL EVP_EncryptInit.pod 0874d7f2 Oct 11 13:13:47 2022 +0100
.\" OpenSSL EVP_aes.pod a1ec85c1 Apr 21 10:49:12 2020 +0100
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work containing a few sentences
.\" written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>
.\" covered by the following license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_AES_128_GCM 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_aes_128_gcm ,
.Nm EVP_aes_192_gcm ,
.Nm EVP_aes_256_gcm
.Nd EVP AES cipher in Galois Counter Mode
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft const EVP_CIPHER *
.Fn EVP_aes_128_gcm void
.Ft const EVP_CIPHER *
.Fn EVP_aes_192_gcm void
.Ft const EVP_CIPHER *
.Fn EVP_aes_256_gcm void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn EVP_aes_128_gcm ,
.Fn EVP_aes_192_gcm ,
and
.Fn EVP_aes_256_gcm
provide the Advanced Encryption Standard algorithm for 128, 192 and 256-bit
keys in and Galois Counter Mode in the
.Xr evp 3
framework.
.Pp
For GCM mode ciphers, the behaviour of the EVP interface is subtly
altered and several additional
.Xr EVP_CIPHER_CTX_ctrl 3
operations are required to function correctly.
Some of the
.Dv EVP_CTRL_GCM_*
control commands are older aliases for corresponding
.Dv EVP_CTRL_AEAD_*
constants as indicated below.
.Pp
To avoid using the cumbersome and error-prone API documented
in the present manual page, consider using the functions documented in
.Xr EVP_AEAD_CTX_init 3
instead.
.Ss Configuration controls
.\" The following constants are intentionally undocumented
.\" because they are very rarely used in application programs:
.\" EVP_GCM_TLS_FIXED_IV_LEN (unused in the library)
.\" EVP_GCM_TLS_EXPLICIT_IV_LEN and EVP_GCM_TLS_TAG_LEN (used internally
.\" only in aes_gcm_tls_cipher(), which is unused)
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv EVP_CTRL_AEAD_SET_IVLEN Pq == Dv EVP_CTRL_GCM_SET_IVLEN
Set the length of the initialization vector to
.Fa arg
bytes; the
.Fa ptr
argument is ignored and passing
.Dv NULL
is recommended.
This call can only be made before specifying an initialization vector.
If not called, the default IV length of 12 bytes is used.
.Pp
Using this control command is discouraged because section 5.2.1.1 of the
specification explicitly recommends that implementations of GCM restrict
support to the default IV length of 12 bytes for interoperability,
efficiency, and simplicity of design.
.It Dv EVP_CTRL_AEAD_SET_IV_FIXED Pq == Dv EVP_CTRL_GCM_SET_IV_FIXED
Usually, \-1 is passed for
.Fa arg .
In that case, the complete initialization vector is copied from
.Fa ptr .
.Pp
Otherwise, set the fixed field at the beginning of the initialization
vector to the
.Fa arg
bytes pointed to by
.Fa ptr .
When encrypting, also generate the remaining bytes
of the initialization vector at random.
It is an error to specify an
.Fa arg
that is less than 4 or so large that less than 8 bytes remain.
.El
.Ss Encryption controls
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv EVP_CTRL_GCM_IV_GEN
Generate the precounter block from the initialization vector,
copy the last
.Fa arg
bytes of the initialization vector to the location pointed to by
.Fa ptr ,
or all of it if
.Fa arg
is less than 1 or greater than the length of the initialization vector,
and increment the initialization vector by 1.
Incrementing ignores the IV length and the fixed field length
that may have been configured earlier and always operates on the
last eight bytes of the initialization vector.
It is an error to issue this command
when no key or no initialization vector is set.
.It Dv EVP_CTRL_AEAD_GET_TAG Pq == Dv EVP_CTRL_GCM_GET_TAG
Write
.Fa arg
bytes of the tag value to the location pointed to by
.Fa ptr .
This control command only makes sense after all data has been processed,
e.g. after calling
.Xr EVP_EncryptFinal 3 .
It is an error to issue this command while decrypting,
before any data has been processed, or to specify an
.Fa arg
that is less than 1 or greater than 16.
.El
.Pp
To specify any additional authenticated data (AAD), call
.Xr EVP_EncryptUpdate 3
with the
.Fa out
argument set to
.Dv NULL .
.Ss Decryption controls
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv EVP_CTRL_GCM_SET_IV_INV
Copy
.Fa arg
bytes from
.Fa ptr
to the last bytes of the initialization vector
and generate the precounter block from the initialization vector.
The library does not check whether the arguments are consistent
with the configured initialization vector and fixed field lengths.
When default lengths are in use, pass 8 for
.Fa arg .
In that case, this control command sets the invocation field.
It is an error to issue this command
when no key or no initialization vector is set, or when encrypting.
.It Dv EVP_CTRL_AEAD_SET_TAG Pq == Dv EVP_CTRL_GCM_SET_TAG
Set the expected tag to the
.Fa arg
bytes located at
.Fa ptr .
This control command is mandatory before any data is processed,
e.g. before calling
.Xr EVP_DecryptUpdate 3 .
It is an error to issue this command while encrypting or to specify an
.Fa arg
that is less than 1 or greater than 16.
.El
.Pp
To specify any additional authenticated data (AAD), call
.Xr EVP_DecryptUpdate 3
with the
.Fa out
argument set to
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
If the return value of
.Xr EVP_DecryptFinal 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DecryptFinal_ex 3 ,
.Xr EVP_CipherFinal 3 ,
or
.Xr EVP_CipherFinal_ex 3
does not indicate success when decrypting,
the authentication operation failed.
In that case, regard any output data as corrupted.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr AES_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr evp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_AEAD_CTX_init 3 ,
.Xr EVP_aes_128_cbc 3 ,
.Xr EVP_CIPHER_CTX_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr EVP_EncryptInit 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A Morris Dworkin
.%I National Institute of Standards and Technology
.%R Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation:\
 Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and GMAC
.%N NIST Special Publication 800-38D
.%C Gaithersburg, Maryland
.%D November 2007
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_aes_128_gcm ,
.Fn EVP_aes_192_gcm ,
and
.Fn EVP_aes_256_gcm
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.1 and have been available since
.Ox 5.3 .
