.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_PKEY_cmp.3,v 1.16 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 05ea606a May 20 20:52:46 2016 -0400
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2006, 2013, 2014, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_PKEY_CMP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_PKEY_missing_parameters ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_copy_parameters ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_cmp_parameters ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_cmp
.\" .Nm EVP_PKEY_save_parameters is intentionally undocumented
.\" because nothing uses it according to codesearch.debian.net
.\" and it only affects X509_PUBKEY_set(3) for DSA,
.\" resulting in incomplete output without the public key parameters.
.Nd public key parameter and comparison functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_missing_parameters
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_copy_parameters
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *destination"
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *source"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_cmp_parameters
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *a"
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *b"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_cmp
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *a"
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *b"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn EVP_PKEY_missing_parameters
checks whether any public key parameters are missing from
.Fa pkey .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_copy_parameters
copies all public key parameters from the
.Fa source
to the
.Fa destination .
If the algorithm does not use parameters, no action occurs.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_cmp_parameters
compares the public key parameters of
.Fa a
and
.Fa b .
This is only supported for algorithms that use parameters.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_cmp
compares the public key components of
.Fa a
and
.Fa b .
If the algorithm uses public key parameters,
it also compares the parameters.
.Pp
The main purpose of the functions
.Fn EVP_PKEY_missing_parameters
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_copy_parameters
is to handle public keys in certificates where the parameters are
sometimes omitted from a public key if they are inherited from the CA
that signed it.
.Pp
Since OpenSSL private keys contain public key components too, the
function
.Fn EVP_PKEY_cmp
can also be used to determine if a private key matches a public key.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn EVP_PKEY_missing_parameters
returns 1 if the public key parameters of
.Fa pkey
are missing or incomplete or 0 if they are present and complete
or if the algorithm doesn't use parameters.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_copy_parameters
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
In particular, it fails if the key types mismatch or if the public
key parameters in the
.Fa source
are missing or incomplete.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_cmp_parameters
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_cmp
return 1 if the keys match, 0 if they don't match, -1 if the key types
are different and -2 if the operation is not supported.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr EVP_PKEY_CTX_new 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_keygen 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_pubkey_parameters 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_PKEY_missing_parameters
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_copy_parameters
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0.
.Fn EVP_PKEY_cmp_parameters
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_cmp
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8 and has been available since
.Ox 4.5 .
