.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_PKEY_size.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL eed9d03b Jan 8 11:04:15 2020 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2022, 2023 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Richard Levitte <levitte@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_PKEY_SIZE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_PKEY_size ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_bits ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_security_bits
.Nd EVP_PKEY information functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_size
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_bits
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_security_bits
.Fa "const EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
returns the maximum size in bytes needed for the output buffer
for almost any operation that can be done with
.Fa pkey .
The primary use is with
.Xr EVP_SignFinal 3
and
.Xr EVP_SealInit 3 .
The returned size is also large enough for the output buffer of
.Xr EVP_PKEY_sign 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_decrypt 3 ,
and
.Xr EVP_PKEY_derive 3 .
.Pp
Unless the documentation for the operation says otherwise,
the size returned by
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
is only an upper limit and the final content of the target
buffer may be smaller.
It is therefore crucial to take note of the size given back by the
function that performs the operation.
For example,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_sign 3
returns that length in the
.Pf * Fa siglen
argument.
.Pp
Using
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
is discouraged with
.Xr EVP_DigestSignFinal 3 .
.Pp
Most functions using an output buffer support passing
.Dv NULL
for the buffer and a pointer to an integer
to get the exact size that this function call delivers
in the context that it is called in.
This allows those functions to be called twice, once to find out the
exact buffer size, then allocate the buffer in between, and call that
function again to actually output the data.
For those functions, it isn't strictly necessary to call
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
to find out the buffer size, but it may still be useful in cases
where it's desirable to know the upper limit in advance.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
is supported for the following algorithms:
.Bl -column ED25519 "EVP_MAX_BLOCK_LENGTH = 32"
.It        Ta same result as from:
.It CMAC   Ta Dv EVP_MAX_BLOCK_LENGTH No = 32
.It DH     Ta Xr DH_size 3
.It DSA    Ta Xr DSA_size 3
.It EC     Ta Xr ECDSA_size 3
.It ED25519 Ta 64, but see below
.It HMAC   Ta Dv EVP_MAX_MD_SIZE No = 64
.It RSA    Ta Xr RSA_size 3
.It X25519 Ta Dv X25519_KEYLEN No = 32
.El
.Pp
For
.Dv EVP_PKEY_ED25519 ,
the situation is special: while the key size is
.Dv ED25519_KEYLEN No = 32 bytes ,
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
returns 64 because the signature is longer than the keys.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_bits
returns the cryptographic length of the cryptosystem to which the key in
.Fa pkey
belongs, in bits.
The definition of cryptographic length is specific to the key cryptosystem.
The following algorithms are supported:
.Bl -column ED25519 "the public domain parameter p" DSA_bits(3)
.It        Ta cryptographic length = Ta same result as from:
.It        Ta significant bits in ... Ta
.It DH     Ta the public domain parameter Fa p Ta Xr DH_bits 3
.It DSA    Ta the public domain parameter Fa p Ta Xr DSA_bits 3
.It EC     Ta the order of the group Ta Xr EC_GROUP_order_bits 3
.It ED25519 Ta 253 Ta \(em
.It RSA    Ta the public modulus Ta Xr RSA_bits 3
.It X25519 Ta 253 Ta \(em
.El
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_security_bits
returns the security strength measured in bits of the given
.Fa pkey
as defined in NIST SP800-57.
The following algorithms are supported:
.Bl -column ED25519 DSA_security_bits(3)
.It        Ta same result as from:
.It DH     Ta Xr DH_security_bits 3
.It DSA    Ta Xr DSA_security_bits 3
.It EC     Ta Xr EC_GROUP_order_bits 3 divided by 2
.It ED25519 Ta 128
.It RSA    Ta Xr RSA_security_bits 3
.It X25519 Ta 128
.El
.Pp
For EC keys, if the result is greater than 80, it is rounded down
to 256, 192, 128, 112, or 80.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_bits
return a positive number or 0 if this size isn't available.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_security_bits
returns a number in the range from 0 to 256 inclusive
or \-2 if this function is unsupported for the algorithm used by
.Fa pkey .
It returns 0 if
.Fa pkey
is
.Dv NULL .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr EVP_PKEY_decrypt 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_derive 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_new 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_sign 3 ,
.Xr EVP_SealInit 3 ,
.Xr EVP_SignFinal 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_PKEY_size
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0 and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_bits
in SSLeay 0.9.0.
Both functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_security_bits
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 7.2 .
