.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_flags.3,v 1.3 2025/06/08 22:40:29 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 5211e094 Nov 11 14:39:11 2014 -0800
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>
.\" and Patrick Steuer <patrick.steuer@de.ibm.com>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2017 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_CIPHER_CTX_SET_FLAGS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_flags ,
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_CTX_clear_flags ,
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_CTX_test_flags ,
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_CTX_rand_key ,
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_param_to_asn1 ,
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_asn1_to_param ,
.\" .Nm EVP_CIPHER_set_asn1_iv and
.\" .Nm EVP_CIPHER_get_asn1_iv are intentionally undocumented
.\" because they are unused according to codesearch.debian.net
.\" and should probably not be public: they seem hardly useful
.\" even for implementing custom EVP_CIPHER algorithms.
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_CTX_get_app_data ,
.Nm EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_app_data
.Nd unusual EVP cipher context configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft void
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_flags
.Fa "EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_CTX_clear_flags
.Fa "EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_CTX_test_flags
.Fa "EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_CTX_rand_key
.Fa "EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "unsigned char *key"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_param_to_asn1
.Fa "EVP_CIPHER_CTX *c"
.Fa "ASN1_TYPE *type"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_asn1_to_param
.Fa "EVP_CIPHER_CTX *c"
.Fa "ASN1_TYPE *type"
.Fc
.Ft void *
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_CTX_get_app_data
.Fa "const EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_app_data
.Fa "const EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "void *data"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_flags
enables the given
.Fa flags
in
.Fa ctx .
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_clear_flags
disables the given
.Fa flags
in
.Fa ctx .
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_test_flags
checks whether any of the given
.Fa flags
are currently set in
.Fa ctx ,
returning the subset of the
.Fa flags
that are set, or 0 if none of them are set.
Currently, the only supported cipher context flag is
.Dv EVP_CIPHER_CTX_FLAG_WRAP_ALLOW ;
see
.Xr EVP_aes_128_wrap 3
for details.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_rand_key
generates a random key of the appropriate length based on the cipher
context.
The
.Vt EVP_CIPHER
can provide its own random key generation routine to support keys
of a specific form.
The
.Fa key
argument must point to a buffer at least as big as the value returned by
.Xr EVP_CIPHER_CTX_key_length 3 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_param_to_asn1
sets the ASN.1
.Vt AlgorithmIdentifier
parameter based on the passed cipher.
This will typically include any parameters and an IV.
The cipher IV (if any) must be set when this call is made.
This call should be made before the cipher is actually "used" (before any
.Xr EVP_EncryptUpdate 3
or
.Xr EVP_DecryptUpdate 3
calls, for example).
This function may fail if the cipher does not have any ASN.1 support.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_asn1_to_param
sets the cipher parameters based on an ASN.1
.Vt AlgorithmIdentifier
parameter.
The precise effect depends on the cipher.
In the case of RC2, for example, it will set the IV and effective
key length.
This function should be called after the base cipher type is set but
before the key is set.
For example
.Xr EVP_CipherInit 3
will be called with the IV and key set to
.Dv NULL ,
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_asn1_to_param
will be called and finally
.Xr EVP_CipherInit 3
again with all parameters except the key set to
.Dv NULL .
It is possible for this function to fail if the cipher does not
have any ASN.1 support or the parameters cannot be set (for example
the RC2 effective key length is not supported).
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_rand_key
return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_param_to_asn1
and
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_asn1_to_param
return greater than zero for success and zero or a negative number
for failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr evp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_CIPHER_CTX_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr EVP_CIPHER_CTX_get_cipher_data 3 ,
.Xr EVP_CIPHER_nid 3 ,
.Xr EVP_EncryptInit 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_set_app_data
and
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_get_app_data
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0.
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_param_to_asn1
and
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_asn1_to_param
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_CIPHER_CTX_rand_key
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8 and has been available since
.Ox 4.5 .
.Sh BUGS
The ASN.1 code is incomplete (and sometimes inaccurate).
It has only been tested for certain common S/MIME ciphers
(RC2, DES, triple DES) in CBC mode.
