.\" $OpenBSD: EVP_sha1.3,v 1.3 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt EVP_SHA1 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm EVP_sha1 ,
.Nm EVP_md5 ,
.Nm EVP_md5_sha1 ,
.Nm EVP_md4
.Nd legacy message digest algorithms
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_sha1 void
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_md5 void
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_md5_sha1 void
.Ft const EVP_MD *
.Fn EVP_md4 void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The following message digest algorithms are cryptographically broken.
None of them should be used in new code unless there is no way around it.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_sha1
implements the SHA-1 algorithm and produces 160 bits of output
from a given input.
Examples of protocols and software still requiring it
include OCSP, DNS, and the
.Sy git
version control system.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_md5
implements the MD5 algorithm and produces 128 bits of output
from a given input.
It is still occasionally used when no security is required
but a fast hash algorithm is beneficial.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_md5_sha1
produces concatenated MD5 and SHA-1 message digests.
Do not use this except where it is required for the historic SSLv3 protocol.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_md4
implements the MD4 algorithm and produces 128 bits of output
from a given input.
It has been marked as
.Dq historic
by the Internet Engineering Task Force since 2011.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return pointers to static
.Vt EVP_MD
objects implementing the hash functions.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr evp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A T. Polk
.%A L. Chen
.%A S. Turner
.%A P. Hoffman
.%T Security Considerations for the SHA-0 and SHA-1 Message-Digest Algorithms
.%R RFC 6194
.%D March 2011
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A S. Turner
.%A L. Chen
.%T Updated Security Considerations for the MD5 Message-Digest\
 and the HMAC-MD5 Algorithms
.%R RFC 6151
.%D March 2011
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A S. Turner
.%A L. Chen
.%T MD4 to Historic Status
.%R RFC 6150
.%D March 2011
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A P. Kocher
.%A P. Karlton
.%A A. Freier
.%T The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Protocol Version 3.0
.%R RFC 6101
.%D August 2011
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_sha1
and
.Fn EVP_md5
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_md4
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.6 and has been available since
.Ox 2.9 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_md5_sha1
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
