.\" $OpenBSD: OBJ_find_sigid_algs.3,v 1.4 2025/06/09 12:42:46 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 9 2025 $
.Dt OBJ_FIND_SIGID_ALGS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OBJ_find_sigid_algs ,
.Nm OBJ_find_sigid_by_algs
.Nd signature algorithm mappings
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/objects.h
.Ft int
.Fo OBJ_find_sigid_algs
.Fa "int signature"
.Fa "int *pdigest"
.Fa "int *pencryption"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OBJ_find_sigid_by_algs
.Fa "int *psignature"
.Fa "int digest"
.Fa "int encryption"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn OBJ_find_sigid_algs
looks up the
.Fa signature
algorithm.
If it is found, the associated digest algorithm is stored in
.Pf * Fa pdigest
unless
.Fa pdigest
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, and the associated encryption algorithm is stored in
.Pf * Fa pencryption
unless
.Fa pencryption
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer.
.Pp
.Fn OBJ_find_sigid_by_algs
looks up the pair
.Pq Fa digest , encryption .
If it is found, the associated signature algorithm is stored in
.Pf * Fa psignature
unless
.Fa psignature
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OBJ_find_sigid_algs
returns 1 if a definition of the
.Fa signature
algorithm is found or 0 if a definition of the
.Fa signature
algorithm is not built into the library.
.Pp
.Fn OBJ_find_sigid_by_algs
returns 1 if a signature algorithm using the specified
.Fa digest
and
.Fa encryption
algorithms is defined or 0 if the definition of such an algorithm
is not built into the library.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr OBJ_create 3 ,
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0
and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
