.\"	$OpenBSD: OCSP_CRLID_new.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt OCSP_CRLID_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OCSP_CRLID_new ,
.Nm OCSP_CRLID_free ,
.Nm OCSP_crlID_new
.Nd OCSP CRL extension
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/ocsp.h
.Ft OCSP_CRLID *
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_new void
.Ft void
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_free "OCSP_CRLID *crlid"
.Ft X509_EXTENSION *
.Fo OCSP_crlID_new
.Fa "const char *url"
.Fa "long *number"
.Fa "char *time"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
If a client asks about the validity of a certificate and it turns
out to be invalid, the responder may optionally communicate which
certificate revocation list the certificate was found on.
The required data is stored as an ASN.1
.Vt CrlID
structure in the singleExtensions field of the
.Vt SingleResponse
structure.
The
.Vt CrlID
is represented by an
.Vt OCSP_CRLID
object, which will be stored inside the
.Vt OCSP_SINGLERESP
object documented in
.Xr OCSP_SINGLERESP_new 3 .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt OCSP_CRLID
object.
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_free
frees
.Fa crlid .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_crlID_new
accepts the
.Fa url
at which the CRL is available, the CRL
.Fa number ,
and/or the
.Fa time
at which the CRL was created.
Each argument can be
.Dv NULL ,
in which case the respective field is omitted.
The resulting
.Vt CrlID
structure is encoded in ASN.1 using
.Xr X509V3_EXT_i2d 3
with criticality 0.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_new
returns a new
.Vt OCSP_CRLID
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_crlID_new
returns a new
.Vt X509_EXTENSION
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr OCSP_REQUEST_new 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_resp_find_status 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_response_status 3 ,
.Xr X509_EXTENSION_new 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 6960: X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online Certificate
Status Protocol, section 4.4.2: CRL References
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_new ,
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_free ,
and
.Fn OCSP_crlID_new
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Sh CAVEATS
The function names
.Fn OCSP_CRLID_new
and
.Fn OCSP_crlID_new
only differ in case.
