.\"	$OpenBSD: OCSP_cert_to_id.3,v 1.15 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2014, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt OCSP_CERT_TO_ID 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OCSP_CERTID_new ,
.Nm OCSP_CERTID_free ,
.Nm OCSP_cert_to_id ,
.Nm OCSP_cert_id_new ,
.Nm OCSP_id_issuer_cmp ,
.Nm OCSP_id_cmp ,
.Nm OCSP_id_get0_info
.Nd OCSP certificate ID utility functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/ocsp.h
.Ft OCSP_CERTID *
.Fn OCSP_CERTID_new void
.Ft void
.Fn OCSP_CERTID_free "OCSP_CERTID *id"
.Ft OCSP_CERTID *
.Fo OCSP_cert_to_id
.Fa "const EVP_MD *dgst"
.Fa "const X509 *subject"
.Fa "const X509 *issuer"
.Fc
.Ft OCSP_CERTID *
.Fo OCSP_cert_id_new
.Fa "const EVP_MD *dgst"
.Fa "const X509_NAME *issuerName"
.Fa "const ASN1_BIT_STRING *issuerKey"
.Fa "const ASN1_INTEGER *serialNumber"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_id_issuer_cmp
.Fa "OCSP_CERTID *a"
.Fa "OCSP_CERTID *b"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_id_cmp
.Fa "OCSP_CERTID *a"
.Fa "OCSP_CERTID *b"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_id_get0_info
.Fa "ASN1_OCTET_STRING **piNameHash"
.Fa "ASN1_OBJECT **pmd"
.Fa "ASN1_OCTET_STRING **pikeyHash"
.Fa "ASN1_INTEGER **pserial"
.Fa "OCSP_CERTID *cid"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn OCSP_CERTID_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt OCSP_CERTID
object, representing an ASN.1
.Vt CertID
structure defined in RFC 6960.
It can store hashes of an issuer's distinguished name and public
key together with a serial number of a certificate.
It is used by the
.Vt OCSP_ONEREQ
object described in
.Xr OCSP_ONEREQ_new 3
and by the
.Vt OCSP_SINGLERESP
object described in
.Xr OCSP_SINGLERESP_new 3 .
.Fn OCSP_CERTID_free
frees
.Fa id .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_cert_to_id
creates and returns a new
.Vt OCSP_CERTID
object using message digest
.Fa dgst
for certificate
.Fa subject
with issuer
.Fa issuer .
If
.Fa dgst
is
.Dv NULL
then SHA-1 is used.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_cert_id_new
creates and returns a new
.Vt OCSP_CERTID
using
.Fa dgst
and issuer name
.Fa issuerName ,
issuer key hash
.Fa issuerKey
and serial number
.Fa serialNumber .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_id_issuer_cmp
compares the hash algorithms,
the hashed issuer distinguished names and
the hashed public keys of
.Vt OCSP_CERTID
.Fa a
and
.Fa b .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_id_cmp
compares
.Vt OCSP_CERTID
.Fa a
and
.Fa b
using
.Fn OCSP_id_issuer_cmp
followed by a comparison of the certificate serial numbers with
.Xr ASN1_INTEGER_cmp 3 .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_id_get0_info
returns the issuer name hash, hash OID, issuer key hash and serial
number contained in
.Fa cid .
If any of the values are not required, the corresponding parameter can be
set to
.Dv NULL .
The values returned by
.Fn OCSP_id_get0_info
are internal pointers and must not be freed up by an application:
they will be freed when the corresponding
.Vt OCSP_CERTID
object is freed.
.Pp
OCSP clients will typically only use
.Fn OCSP_cert_to_id
or
.Fn OCSP_cert_id_new :
the other functions are used by responder applications.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OCSP_CERTID_new ,
.Fn OCSP_cert_to_id ,
and
.Fn OCSP_cert_id_new
return either a pointer to a valid
.Vt OCSP_CERTID
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_id_cmp
and
.Fn OCSP_id_issuer_cmp
return 0 for a match or non-zero otherwise.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_id_get0_info
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASN1_INTEGER_cmp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_request_add1_nonce 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_REQUEST_new 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_resp_find_status 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_response_status 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_sendreq_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_issuer_name 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_ocspid_print 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 6960: X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online Certificate
Status Protocol, section 4: Details of the Protocol
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7
and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
