.\" $OpenBSD: OCSP_sendreq_new.3,v 1.11 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018, 2019 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2014, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt OCSP_SENDREQ_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OCSP_sendreq_new ,
.Nm OCSP_sendreq_nbio ,
.Nm OCSP_REQ_CTX_free ,
.Nm OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header ,
.Nm OCSP_REQ_CTX_set1_req ,
.Nm OCSP_parse_url ,
.Nm OCSP_sendreq_bio
.Nd OCSP responder query functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/ocsp.h
.Ft OCSP_REQ_CTX *
.Fo OCSP_sendreq_new
.Fa "BIO *io"
.Fa "const char *path"
.Fa "OCSP_REQUEST *req"
.Fa "int maxline"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_sendreq_nbio
.Fa "OCSP_RESPONSE **presp"
.Fa "OCSP_REQ_CTX *rctx"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo OCSP_REQ_CTX_free
.Fa "OCSP_REQ_CTX *rctx"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header
.Fa "OCSP_REQ_CTX *rctx"
.Fa "const char *name"
.Fa "const char *value"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_REQ_CTX_set1_req
.Fa "OCSP_REQ_CTX *rctx"
.Fa "OCSP_REQUEST *req"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_parse_url
.Fa "const char *url"
.Fa "char **phost"
.Fa "char **pport"
.Fa "char **ppath"
.Fa "int *pssl"
.Fc
.Ft OCSP_RESPONSE *
.Fo OCSP_sendreq_bio
.Fa "BIO *io"
.Fa "const char *path"
.Fa "OCSP_REQUEST *req"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The function
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_new
returns an
.Vt OCSP_REQ_CTX
structure using the responder
.Fa io ,
the URI path
.Fa path ,
the OCSP request
.Fa req
and with a response header maximum line length of
.Fa maxline .
If
.Fa maxline
is zero, a default value of 4k is used.
The OCSP request
.Fa req
may be set to
.Dv NULL
and provided later if required.
.Pp
The arguments to
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_new
correspond to the components of the URI.
For example, if the responder URI is
.Pa http://ocsp.com/ocspreq ,
the BIO
.Fa io
should be connected to host
.Pa ocsp.com
on port 80 and
.Fa path
should be set to
.Qq /ocspreq .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_nbio
performs non-blocking I/O on the OCSP request context
.Fa rctx .
When the operation is complete, it returns the response in
.Pf * Fa presp .
If
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_nbio
indicates an operation should be retried, the corresponding BIO can
be examined to determine which operation (read or write) should be
retried and appropriate action can be taken, for example a
.Xr select 2
call on the underlying socket.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_free
frees up the OCSP context
.Fa rctx .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header
adds header
.Fa name
with value
.Fa value
to the context
.Fa rctx .
The added headers are of the form
.Qq Fa name : value
or just
.Qq Fa name
if
.Fa value
is
.Dv NULL .
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header
can be called more than once to add multiple headers.
It must be called before any calls to
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_nbio .
The
.Fa req
parameter in the initial to
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_new
call must be set to
.Dv NULL
if additional headers are set.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_set1_req
sets the OCSP request in
.Fa rctx
to
.Fa req .
This function should be called after any calls to
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_parse_url
is a utility function to parse a
.Fa url
of the form
.Sm off
.Sy http Op Sy s
.Pf :// Ar host
.Op : Ar port
.Op / Ar path
.Sm on
and store pointers to newly allocated copies of the strings
.Ar host ,
.Ar port ,
and
.Ar path
in
.Pf * phost ,
.Pf * pport ,
and
.Pf * ppath ,
respectively.
By default,
.Pf * ppath
is set to
.Qq /
and
.Pf * pport
to
.Qq 443
for
.Sy https
or
.Qq 80
for
.Sy http .
For
.Sy https ,
.Pf * Fa pssl
is set to 1; otherwise, to 0.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_bio
performs an OCSP request using the responder
.Fa io ,
the URI path
.Fa path ,
the OCSP request
.Fa req .
It does not support retries and so cannot handle non-blocking I/O
efficiently.
It is retained for compatibility and its use in new applications
is not recommended.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_new
returns a valid
.Vt OCSP_REQ_CTX
structure or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_nbio
returns 1 if the operation was completed successfully,
-1 if the operation should be retried,
or 0 if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header ,
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_set1_req ,
and
.Fn OCSP_parse_url
return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_bio
returns the
.Vt OCSP_RESPONSE
structure sent by the responder or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Add a Host header for
.Pa ocsp.com :
.Pp
.Dl OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header(ctx, "Host", "ocsp.com");
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr OCSP_cert_to_id 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_request_add1_nonce 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_REQUEST_new 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_resp_find_status 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_response_status 3 ,
.Xr X509_get1_ocsp 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn OCSP_parse_url
and
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_bio
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_new ,
.Fn OCSP_sendreq_nbio ,
and
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_free
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h and have been available since
.Ox 4.5 .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_add1_header
and
.Fn OCSP_REQ_CTX_set1_req
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
.Sh CAVEATS
These functions only perform a minimal HTTP query to a responder.
If an application wishes to support more advanced features, it
should use an alternative, more complete, HTTP library.
.Pp
Currently only HTTP POST queries to responders are supported.
