.\" $OpenBSD: OCSP_SERVICELOC_new.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt OCSP_SERVICELOC_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OCSP_SERVICELOC_new ,
.Nm OCSP_SERVICELOC_free ,
.Nm OCSP_url_svcloc_new
.Nd OCSP service locator extension
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/ocsp.h
.Ft OCSP_SERVICELOC *
.Fn OCSP_SERVICELOC_new void
.Ft void
.Fn OCSP_SERVICELOC_free "OCSP_SERVICELOC *sloc"
.Ft X509_EXTENSION *
.Fo OCSP_url_svcloc_new
.Fa "X509_NAME *issuer"
.Fa "const char **urls"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Due to restrictions of network routing, a client may be unable to
directly contact the authoritative OCSP server for a certificate
that needs to be checked.
In that case, the request can be sent via a proxy server.
An ASN.1
.Vt ServiceLocator
structure is included in the singleRequestExtensions field of the
.Vt Request
structure to indicate where to forward the request.
The
.Vt ServiceLocator
is represented by a
.Vt OCSP_SERVICELOC
object, which will be stored inside the
.Vt OCSP_ONEREQ
object documented in
.Xr OCSP_ONEREQ_new 3 .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_SERVICELOC_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt OCSP_SERVICELOC
object.
.Fn OCSP_SERVICELOC_free
frees
.Fa sloc .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_url_svcloc_new
requires an
.Fa issuer
name and optionally accepts an array of
.Fa urls .
If
.Fa urls
or its first element is
.Dv NULL ,
the locator field is omitted from the
.Vt ServiceLocator
structure and only the issuer is included.
The resulting
.Vt ServiceLocator
structure is encoded in ASN.1 using
.Xr X509V3_EXT_i2d 3
with criticality 0.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OCSP_SERVICELOC_new
returns a new
.Vt OCSP_SERVICELOC
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_url_svcloc_new
returns a new
.Vt X509_EXTENSION
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr OCSP_REQUEST_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_EXTENSION_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_get1_ocsp 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_issuer_name 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_new 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 6960: X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online Certificate
Status Protocol, section 4.4.6: Service Locator
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn OCSP_SERVICELOC_new ,
.Fn OCSP_SERVICELOC_free ,
and
.Fn OCSP_url_svcloc_new
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
