.\"	$OpenBSD: OCSP_request_add1_nonce.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2014, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt OCSP_REQUEST_ADD1_NONCE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OCSP_request_add1_nonce ,
.Nm OCSP_basic_add1_nonce ,
.Nm OCSP_check_nonce ,
.Nm OCSP_copy_nonce
.Nd OCSP nonce functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/ocsp.h
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_request_add1_nonce
.Fa "OCSP_REQUEST *req"
.Fa "unsigned char *val"
.Fa "int len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_basic_add1_nonce
.Fa "OCSP_BASICRESP *resp"
.Fa "unsigned char *val"
.Fa "int len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_check_nonce
.Fa "OCSP_REQUEST *req"
.Fa "OCSP_BASICRESP *resp"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo OCSP_copy_nonce
.Fa "OCSP_BASICRESP *resp"
.Fa "OCSP_REQUEST *req"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An OCSP nonce is typically added to an OCSP request to thwart replay
attacks by checking the same nonce value appears in the response.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_request_add1_nonce
adds a nonce of value
.Fa val
and length
.Fa len
to OCSP request
.Fa req .
If
.Fa val
is
.Dv NULL ,
a random nonce is used.
If
.Fa len
is zero or negative, a default length will be used (currently 16 bytes).
For most purposes the nonce value in a request is set to a random value
so the
.Fa val
parameter in
.Fn OCSP_request_add1_nonce
is usually NULL.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_basic_add1_nonce
is identical to
.Fn OCSP_request_add1_nonce
except it adds a nonce to OCSP basic response
.Fa resp .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_check_nonce
compares the nonce value in
.Fa req
and
.Fa resp .
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_copy_nonce
copies any nonce value present in
.Fa req
to
.Fa resp .
.Pp
Some responders may include a nonce in all responses even if one is not
supplied.
.Pp
Some responders cache OCSP responses and do not sign each response for
performance reasons.
As a result they do not support nonces.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OCSP_request_add1_nonce
and
.Fn OCSP_basic_add1_nonce
return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_copy_nonce
returns 1 if a nonce was successfully copied, 2 if no nonce was
present in
.Fa req ,
or 0 if an error occurred.
.Pp
.Fn OCSP_check_nonce
returns positive values for success: 1 if nonces are present and
equal, 2 if both nonces are absent, or 3 if a nonce is present in
the response only.
A zero return value indicates that both nonces are present but
mismatch: this should be treated as an error condition.
A return value of -1 indicates that a nonce is present in the request
only: this will happen if the responder doesn't support nonces.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr OCSP_cert_to_id 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_REQUEST_new 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_resp_find_status 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_response_status 3 ,
.Xr OCSP_sendreq_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7
and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
