.\" $OpenBSD: OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER.3,v 1.14 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 1f13ad31 Dec 25 17:50:39 2017 +0800
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, 2018 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>,
.\" Richard Levitte <levitte@openssl.org>, and
.\" Bodo Moeller <bodo@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2002, 2015, 2016, 2017 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER ,
.Nm LIBRESSL_VERSION_NUMBER ,
.Nm LIBRESSL_VERSION_TEXT ,
.Nm OPENSSL_VERSION_TEXT ,
.Nm OpenSSL_version_num ,
.Nm OpenSSL_version ,
.Nm SSLeay ,
.Nm SSLeay_version
.Nd get OpenSSL version number
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/opensslv.h
.Fd #define OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER 0x020000000L
.Fd #define LIBRESSL_VERSION_NUMBER 0x02nnnn00fL
.Fd #define LIBRESSL_VERSION_TEXT \(dqLibreSSL 2.n.n\(dq
.Fd #define OPENSSL_VERSION_TEXT LIBRESSL_VERSION_TEXT
.In openssl/crypto.h
.Ft unsigned long
.Fn OpenSSL_version_num void
.Ft const char *
.Fo OpenSSL_version
.Fa "int t"
.Fc
.Ft long
.Fn SSLeay void
.Ft const char *
.Fo SSLeay_version
.Fa "int t"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Dv OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER
and
.Dv LIBRESSL_VERSION_NUMBER
are numeric release version identifiers.
The first two digits contain the major release number,
the third and fourth digits the minor release number,
and the fifth and sixth digits the fix release number.
For OpenSSL, the seventh and eight digits contain the patch release number
and the final digit is 0 for development, 1 to e for betas 1 to 14, or f
for release.
For LibreSSL,
.Dv OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER
is always 0x020000000,
and
.Dv LIBRESSL_VERSION_NUMBER
always ends with 00f.
.Pp
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER:
0x000906000 == 0.9.6 dev
0x000906023 == 0.9.6b beta 3
0x00090605f == 0.9.6e release
0x020000000 == 2.0.0 for any version of LibreSSL

LIBRESSL_VERSION_NUMBER:
0x02070000f == LibreSSL 2.7.0
.Ed
.Pp
OpenSSL versions prior to 0.9.3 had identifiers < 0x0930.
For versions between 0.9.3 and 0.9.5,
the seventh digit was 1 for release and 0 otherwise,
and the eighth and ninth digits were the patch release number.
.Pp
For example:
.Bd -literal
0x000904100 == 0.9.4 release
0x000905000 == 0.9.5 dev
.Ed
.Pp
OpenSSL version 0.9.5a had an interim interpretation that is like the current
one, except the patch level got the highest bit set, to keep continuity.
The number was therefore 0x0090581f.
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_version_num
returns
.Dv OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER .
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_version
returns different strings depending on
.Fa t :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv OPENSSL_VERSION
The text variant of the version number,
.Dv OPENSSL_VERSION_TEXT .
For OpenSSL, it includes the release date, for example
.Qq OpenSSL 0.9.5a 1 Apr 2000 .
For LibreSSL,
.Dv LIBRESSL_VERSION_TEXT
is returned.
.It Dv OPENSSL_CFLAGS
The compiler flags set for the compilation process in the form
.Qq compiler: ...
if available or
.Qq compiler: information not available
otherwise.
LibreSSL never provides compiler information.
.It Dv OPENSSL_BUILT_ON
The date of the build process in the form
.Qq built on: ...
if available or
.Qq built on: date not available
otherwise.
LibreSSL never provides information on the build date.
.It Dv OPENSSL_PLATFORM
The Configure target of the library build in the form
.Qq platform: ...
if available or
.Qq platform: information not available
otherwise.
LibreSSL never provides platform information.
.It Dv OPENSSL_DIR
The
.Dv OPENSSLDIR
setting of the library build in the form
.Qq OPENSSLDIR: Qq ...
if available or
.Qq OPENSSLDIR: N/A
otherwise.
For LibreSSL, the default is
.Qq OPENSSLDIR: Qq /etc/ssl .
.It Dv OPENSSL_ENGINES_DIR
The
.Dv ENGINESDIR
setting of the library build in the form
.Qq ENGINESDIR: Qq ...
if available or
.Qq ENGINESDIR: N/A
otherwise.
LibreSSL never provides or uses an
.Dv ENGINESDIR .
.El
.Pp
For an unknown
.Fa t ,
the text
.Qq not available
is returned.
.Pp
For backward compatibility,
.Dv SSLEAY_VERSION_NUMBER
is an alias for
.Dv OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER
and
.Fn SSLeay
for
.Fn OpenSSL_version_num .
The legacy function
.Fn SSLeay_version
is similar to
.Fn OpenSSL_version
except that it takes arguments
.Dv SSLEAY_VERSION ,
.Dv SSLEAY_CFLAGS ,
.Dv SSLEAY_BUILT_ON ,
.Dv SSLEAY_PLATFORM ,
and
.Dv SSLEAY_DIR
which expand to
.Em other
numerical values than the corresponding
.Dv OPENSSL_*
macros.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OpenSSL_version_num
and
.Fn SSLeay
return a constant version number.
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_version
and
.Fn SSLeay_version
return pointers to static strings.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypto 3 ,
.Xr OPENSSL_config 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSLeay ,
.Fn SSLeay_version ,
and
.Dv SSLEAY_VERSION_NUMBER
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Dv OPENSSL_VERSION_NUMBER
first appeared in the first OpenSSL release, OpenSSL 0.9.1c,
and has been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Pp
.Dv SSLEAY_DIR
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Pp
.Dv LIBRESSL_VERSION_NUMBER
first appeared in LibreSSL 2.0.0 and
.Ox 5.6
and got its final format in LibreSSL 2.3.2 and
.Ox 5.9 .
.Dv LIBRESSL_VERSION_TEXT
first appeared in LibreSSL 2.2.2 and
.Ox 5.8 .
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_version_num
and
.Fn OpenSSL_version
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0
and have been available since LibreSSL 2.7.1 and
.Ox 6.3 .
