.\" $OpenBSD: OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms.3,v 1.19 2025/06/12 15:59:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL b3696a55 Sep 2 09:35:50 2017 -0400
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018, 2019, 2023, 2025 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2003, 2013 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 12 2025 $
.Dt OPENSSL_ADD_ALL_ALGORITHMS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms ,
.Nm OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers ,
.Nm OpenSSL_add_all_digests ,
.Nm EVP_cleanup ,
.Nm SSLeay_add_all_algorithms
.\" .Nm OPENSSL_add_all_algorithms_conf ,
.\" .Nm OPENSSL_add_all_algorithms_noconf ,
.\" .Nm SSLeay_add_all_ciphers , and
.\" .Nm SSLeay_add_all_digests are intentionally undocumented
.\" because they are unused aliases.
.Nd add algorithms to internal table
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft void
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms void
.Ft void
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers void
.Ft void
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_digests void
.Ft void
.Fn EVP_cleanup void
.Ft void
.Fn SSLeay_add_all_algorithms void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions are deprecated.
It is never useful for any application program
to call any of them explicitly.
Most of them have no effect except that they may or may not call
.Xr OPENSSL_init_crypto 3 .
.Pp
The library contains internal tables of digest algorithms and ciphers.
It uses these tables to look up digests and ciphers via
.Xr EVP_get_digestbyname 3
and
.Xr EVP_get_cipherbyname 3 ,
respectively.
In LibreSSL, these tables are static constants and do not require
initialization.
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms
used to add all digests and ciphers to the tables.
If an application is compiled with the preprocessor symbol
.Dv OPENSSL_LOAD_CONF
defined, it also calls
.Xr OPENSSL_config 3
with a
.Dv NULL
argument, loading the default configuration file.
Relying on this behaviour is not recommended.
If loading a configuration file is desired, call
.Xr OPENSSL_config 3
or
.Xr CONF_modules_load_file 3
directly.
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_digests
used to add all digest algorithms to the table.
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers
used to add all encryption algorithms to the table.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_cleanup
has no effect; it used to remove various kinds of application-supplied
data that is no longer supported in the first place.
.Pp
.Fn SSLeay_add_all_algorithms
is a deprecated alias for
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms .
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms
and
.Fn SSLeay_add_all_algorithms
are implemented as macros.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr evp 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3 ,
.Xr EVP_EncryptInit 3 ,
.Xr OPENSSL_config 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn EVP_cleanup ,
.Fn SSLeay_add_all_algorithms ,
and precursor functions
.Fn SSLeay_add_all_ciphers
and
.Fn SSLeay_add_all_digests
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms ,
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers ,
and
.Fn OpenSSL_add_all_digests
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5 and have been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
.Sh BUGS
Although the functions do not return error codes, it is possible for them
to fail.
