.\" $OpenBSD: PKCS12_create.3,v 1.14 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 05ea606a May 20 20:52:46 2016 -0400
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL 61f805c1 Jan 16 01:01:46 2018 +0800
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2015 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS12_CREATE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS12_create
.Nd create a PKCS#12 structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs12.h
.Ft PKCS12 *
.Fo PKCS12_create
.Fa "const char *pass"
.Fa "const char *name"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fa "X509 *cert"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *ca"
.Fa "int nid_key"
.Fa "int nid_cert"
.Fa "int iter"
.Fa "int mac_iter"
.Fa "int keytype"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn PKCS12_create
creates a PKCS#12 structure.
.Pp
.Fa pass
is the passphrase to use.
.Fa name
is the
.Sy friendlyName
to use for the supplied certificate and key.
.Fa pkey
is the private key to include in the structure and
.Fa cert
its corresponding certificates.
.Fa ca
is an optional set of certificates to also include in the structure.
.Fa pkey ,
.Fa cert ,
or both can be
.Dv NULL
to indicate that no key or certificate is required.
.Pp
.Fa nid_key
and
.Fa nid_cert
are the encryption algorithms that should be used for the key and
certificate, respectively.
If either
.Fa nid_key
or
.Fa nid_cert
is set to -1, no encryption will be used.
.Pp
.Fa iter
is the encryption algorithm iteration count to use and
.Fa mac_iter
is the MAC iteration count to use.
If
.Fa mac_iter
is set to -1, the MAC will be omitted entirely.
.Pp
.Fa keytype
is the type of key.
.Pp
The parameters
.Fa nid_key ,
.Fa nid_cert ,
.Fa iter ,
.Fa mac_iter ,
and
.Fa keytype
can all be set to zero and sensible defaults will be used.
.Pp
These defaults are: 40-bit RC2 encryption for certificates, triple DES
encryption for private keys, a key iteration count of
PKCS12_DEFAULT_ITER (currently 2048) and a MAC iteration count of 1.
.Pp
The default MAC iteration count is 1 in order to retain compatibility
with old software which did not interpret MAC iteration counts.
If such compatibility is not required then
.Fa mac_iter
should be set to PKCS12_DEFAULT_ITER.
.Pp
.Fa keytype
adds a flag to the store private key.
This is a non-standard extension that is only currently interpreted by
MSIE.
If set to zero, the flag is omitted; if set to
.Dv KEY_SIG ,
the key can be used for signing only; and if set to
.Dv KEY_EX ,
it can be used for signing and encryption.
This option was useful for old export grade software which could use
signing only keys of arbitrary size but had restrictions on the
permissible sizes of keys which could be used for encryption.
.Pp
If a certificate contains an
.Sy alias
or
.Sy keyid
then this will be used for the corresponding
.Sy friendlyName
or
.Sy localKeyID
in the PKCS12 structure.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn PKCS12_create
returns a valid
.Vt PKCS12
structure or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypto 3 ,
.Xr d2i_PKCS12 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_newpass 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_parse 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_SAFEBAG_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_keyid_set1 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn PKCS12_create
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.3 and has been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Pp
Before OpenSSL 0.9.8, neither
.Fa pkey
nor
.Fa cert
were allowed to be
.Dv NULL ,
and a value of -1 was not allowed for
.Fa nid_key ,
.Fa nid_cert ,
and
.Fa mac_iter .
