.\" $OpenBSD: PKCS7_dataFinal.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS7_DATAFINAL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS7_dataFinal
.Nd move data from a BIO chain to a ContentInfo object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs7.h
.Ft int
.Fo PKCS7_dataFinal
.Fa "PKCS7 *p7"
.Fa "BIO *chain"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn PKCS7_dataFinal
transfers the data from the memory BIO at the end of the given
.Fa chain
into the appropriate content field of
.Fa p7
itself or of its appropriate substructure.
It is typically used as the final step of populating
.Fa p7 ,
after creating the
.Fa chain
with
.Xr PKCS7_dataInit 3
and after writing the data into it.
.Pp
After calling
.Fn PKCS7_dataFinal ,
the program can call
.Xr BIO_free_all 3
on the
.Fa chain
because such chains are not designed for reuse.
.Pp
Depending on the
.Fa contentType
of
.Fa p7 ,
.Fn PKCS7_dataFinal
sets the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It for Vt SignedData No or Vt DigestedData :
in substructures of the
.Fa content
field of
.Fa p7 :
the
.Fa content
field in the
.Vt ContentInfo
structure (unless
.Fa p7
is configured to store a detached signature) and the
.Fa encryptedDigest
fields in all the
.Vt SignerInfo
structures
.It for Vt EnvelopedData No or Vt SignedAndEnvelopedData :
the
.Fa encryptedContent
field in the
.Vt EncryptedContentInfo
structure contained in the
.Fa content
field of
.Fa p7
.It for arbitrary data :
the
.Fa content
field of
.Fa p7
itself
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn PKCS7_dataFinal
returns 1 on success or 0 on failure.
.Pp
Possible reasons for failure include:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset 2n -width 1n
.It
.Fa p7
is
.Dv NULL .
.It
The
.Fa content
field of
.Fa p7
is empty.
.It
The
.Fa contentType
of
.Fa p7
is unsupported.
.It
The
.Fa chain
does not contain the expected memory BIO.
.It
Signing or digesting is requested and
.Fa p7
is not configured to store a detached signature,
but does not contain the required field to store the content either.
.It
At least one signer lacks a usable digest algorithm.
.It
Signing or digesting fails.
.It
Memory allocation fails.
.El
.Pp
Signers lacking private keys do not cause failure
but are silently skipped.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_dataInit 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_final 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn PKCS7_dataFinal
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.1 and has been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Sh CAVEATS
This function does not support
.Vt EncryptedData .
.Pp
Even though this function is typically used after
.Xr PKCS7_dataInit 3
and even though
.Xr PKCS7_dataInit 3
also supports reading from
.Vt ContentInfo
structures that are already fully populated, do not use
.Fn PKCS7_dataFinal
on fully populated structures.
It is only intended for putting data into new structures
and it is neither needed nor suitable for reading.
