.\"	$OpenBSD: PKCS12_newpass.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL c95a8b4e May 5 14:26:26 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Jeffrey Walton <noloader@gmail.com>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS12_NEWPASS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS12_newpass
.Nd change the password of a PKCS#12 structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs12.h
.Ft int
.Fo PKCS12_newpass
.Fa "PKCS12 *p12"
.Fa "const char *oldpass"
.Fa "const char *newpass"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn PKCS12_newpass
changes the password of a PKCS#12 structure.
.Pp
.Fa p12
is a pointer to a PKCS#12 structure.
.Fa oldpass
is the existing password and
.Fa newpass
is the new password.
.Pp
If the PKCS#12 structure does not have a password, use the empty
string
.Qq \&
for
.Fa oldpass .
Passing
.Dv NULL
for
.Fa oldpass
results in a
.Fn PKCS12_newpass
failure.
.Pp
If the wrong password is used for
.Fa oldpass ,
the function will fail with a MAC verification error.
In rare cases, the PKCS#12 structure does not contain a MAC:
in this case it will usually fail with a decryption padding error.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, 1 is returned;
otherwise 0 is returned and an error code can be retrieved with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
This example loads a PKCS#12 file, changes its password,
and writes out the result to a new file.
.Bd -literal
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <openssl/pem.h>
#include <openssl/err.h>
#include <openssl/pkcs12.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
	FILE *fp;
	PKCS12 *p12;
	if (argc != 5) {
		fprintf(stderr,
		    "Usage: pkread p12file password newpass opfile\en");
		return 1;
	}
	if ((fp = fopen(argv[1], "rb")) == NULL) {
		fprintf(stderr, "Error opening file %s\en", argv[1]);
		return 1;
	}
	p12 = d2i_PKCS12_fp(fp, NULL);
	fclose(fp);
	if (p12 == NULL) {
		fprintf(stderr, "Error reading PKCS#12 file\en");
		ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
		return 1;
	}
	if (PKCS12_newpass(p12, argv[2], argv[3]) == 0) {
		fprintf(stderr, "Error changing password\en");
		ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
		PKCS12_free(p12);
		return 1;
	}
	if ((fp = fopen(argv[4], "wb")) == NULL) {
		fprintf(stderr, "Error opening file %s\en", argv[4]);
		PKCS12_free(p12);
		return 1;
	}
	i2d_PKCS12_fp(fp, p12);
	PKCS12_free(p12);
	fclose(fp);
	return 0;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr PKCS12_create 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn PKCS12_newpass
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5 and has been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
.Sh BUGS
The password format is a NUL terminated ASCII string which is
converted to Unicode form internally.
As a result, some passwords cannot be supplied to this function.
