.\" $OpenBSD: PKCS7_set_type.3,v 1.3 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS7_SET_TYPE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS7_set_type ,
.Nm PKCS7_set0_type_other
.Nd initialize type of PKCS#7 ContentInfo
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs7.h
.Ft int
.Fo PKCS7_set_type
.Fa "PKCS7 *p7"
.Fa "int type"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo PKCS7_set0_type_other
.Fa "PKCS7 *p7"
.Fa "int type"
.Fa "ASN1_TYPE *content"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions set the
.Fa type
of an unused
.Vt ContentInfo
structure
.Fa p7 .
.Pp
The function
.Fn PKCS7_set_type
also allocates and initializes an empty child object in
.Fa p7 .
The
.Fa type
argument can be any of these NIDs,
creating a child object of the indicated data type:
.Pp
.Bl -column NID_pkcs7_signedAndEnveloped PKCS7_SIGN_ENVELOPE n.a. -compact
.It Fa type No argument             Ta data type of child     Ta version
.It Dv NID_pkcs7_data               Ta Vt ASN1_OCTET_STRING   Ta n.a.
.It Dv NID_pkcs7_digest             Ta Vt PKCS7_DIGEST        Ta 0
.It Dv NID_pkcs7_encrypted          Ta Vt PKCS7_ENCRYPT       Ta 0
.It Dv NID_pkcs7_enveloped          Ta Vt PKCS7_ENVELOPE      Ta 0
.It Dv NID_pkcs7_signed             Ta Vt PKCS7_SIGNED        Ta 1
.It Dv NID_pkcs7_signedAndEnveloped Ta Vt PKCS7_SIGN_ENVELOPE Ta 1
.El
.Pp
If the provided
.Fa type
is invalid,
.Fa p7
remains unchanged and
.Fn PKCS7_set_type
fails.
.Pp
If memory allocation fails,
.Fn PKCS7_set_type
fails and
.Fa p7
may remain in an inconsistent state.
.Pp
The function
.Fn PKCS7_set0_type_other
accepts an arbitrary NID as the
.Fa type
and also sets the
.Fa content ,
neither checking it in any way nor copying it.
.Pp
For both functions, the rest of the internal state of
.Fa p7
remains unchanged.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The function
.Fn PKCS7_set_type
returns 1 on success or 0 on failure.
.Pp
The function
.Fn PKCS7_set0_type_other
does no error handling at all and always returns 1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASN1_OCTET_STRING_new 3 ,
.Xr ASN1_TYPE_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_set_content 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3
.Sh HISTORY
The function
.Fn PKCS7_set_type
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.1 and
.Fn PKCS7_set0_type_other
in OpenSSL 0.9.8.
Both have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Sh CAVEATS
If
.Fa p7
has already been in use before being passed to one of these functions,
it will report success even though it leaks memory.
Later on, if other functions try to use
.Fa p7
in its former role, they are likely to misbehave.
