.\"	$OpenBSD: PKCS12_SAFEBAG_new.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS12_SAFEBAG_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS12_SAFEBAG_new ,
.Nm PKCS12_SAFEBAG_free ,
.Nm PKCS12_BAGS_new ,
.Nm PKCS12_BAGS_free
.Nd PKCS#12 container for one piece of information
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs12.h
.Ft PKCS12_SAFEBAG *
.Fn PKCS12_SAFEBAG_new void
.Ft void
.Fn PKCS12_SAFEBAG_free "PKCS12_SAFEBAG *safebag"
.Ft PKCS12_BAGS *
.Fn PKCS12_BAGS_new void
.Ft void
.Fn PKCS12_BAGS_free "PKCS12_BAGS *bag"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn PKCS12_SAFEBAG_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt PKCS12_SAFEBAG
object, representing an ASN.1
.Vt SafeBag
structure defined in RFC 7292 section 4.2.
It can hold a pointer to a
.Vt PKCS12_BAGS
object together with a type identifier and optional attributes.
.Fn PKCS12_SAFEBAG_free
frees
.Fa safebag .
.Pp
.Fn PKCS12_BAGS_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt PKCS12_BAGS
object, representing the bagValue field of an ASN.1
.Vt SafeBag
structure.
It is used in
.Vt PKCS12_SAFEBAG
and can hold a DER-encoded X.509 certificate,
a base64-encoded SDSI certificate,
a DER-encoded X.509 CRL,
or other user-defined information.
.Pp
If an instance of
.Vt PKCS12_SAFEBAG
contains
.Vt PKCS8_PRIV_KEY_INFO ,
.Vt X509_SIG ,
or nested
.Vt PKCS12_SAFEBAG
objects, the respective pointers are stored directly in the
.Vt PKCS12_SAFEBAG
object rather than in the contained
.Vt PKCS12_BAGS
object as required by RFC 7292.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn PKCS12_SAFEBAG_new
and
.Fn PKCS12_BAGS_new
return the new
.Vt PKCS12_SAFEBAG
or
.Vt PKCS12_BAGS
object, respectively, or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr PKCS12_create 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS8_PRIV_KEY_INFO_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_ATTRIBUTE_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_SIG_new 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 7292: PKCS #12: Personal Information Exchange Syntax,
section 4.2: The SafeBag Type
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn PKCS12_SAFEBAG_new ,
.Fn PKCS12_SAFEBAG_free ,
.Fn PKCS12_BAGS_new ,
and
.Fn PKCS12_BAGS_free
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.3 and have been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
