.\" $OpenBSD: PKCS7_final.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS7_FINAL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS7_final
.Nd read data from a BIO into a ContentInfo object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs7.h
.Ft int
.Fo PKCS7_final
.Fa "PKCS7 *p7"
.Fa "BIO *data"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn PKCS7_final
reads
.Fa data
and puts it into the appropriate content field of
.Fa p7
itself or of its appropriate substructure, which can be of type
.Vt SignedData ,
.Vt EnvelopedData ,
.Vt SignedAndEnvelopedData ,
.Vt DigestedData ,
or arbitrary data.
The
.Xr PKCS7_dataFinal 3
manual explains which field exactly the data is put into.
.Pp
The following
.Fa flags
are recognized:
.Bl -tag -width PKCS7_BINARY
.It Dv PKCS7_BINARY
Copy the data verbatim without changing any bytes.
By default, line endings are replaced with two-byte
.Qq \er\en
sequences (ASCII CR+LF).
If this flag is set,
.Dv PKCS7_TEXT
is ignored.
.It Dv PKCS7_TEXT
Prepend
.Qq Content-Type: text/plain
followed by a blank line to the data.
This flag is ignored if
.Dv PKCS7_BINARY
is also set.
.El
.Pp
If any other bits are set in
.Fa flags ,
for example
.Dv PKCS7_STREAM
or
.Dv PKCS7_PARTIAL ,
they are ignored, allowing to pass the same
.Fa flags
argument that was already passed to
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3
or
.Xr PKCS7_encrypt 3 .
.Pp
.Fn PKCS7_final
is most commonly used to finalize a
.Fa p7
object returned from a call to
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3
that used
.Fa flags
including
.Dv PKCS7_PARTIAL
or
.Dv PKCS7_STREAM .
With these flags,
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3
ignores its
.Fa data
argument.
The partial
.Fa p7
object returned can then be customized, for example setting up
multiple signers or non-default digest algorithms with
.Xr PKCS7_sign_add_signer 3 ,
before calling
.Fn PKCS7_final .
.Pp
Similarly,
.Fn PKCS7_final
can be used to finalize a
.Fa p7
object returned from a call to
.Xr PKCS7_encrypt 3
that used
.Fa flags
including
.Dv PKCS7_STREAM .
.Pp
Since
.Fn PKCS7_final
starts by calling
.Xr PKCS7_dataInit 3
internally, using it to finalize a
.Fa p7
object containing
.Vt SignedAndEnvelopedData ,
.Vt DigestedData ,
or arbitrary data requires the setup described in the
.Xr PKCS7_dataInit 3
manual.
For
.Vt SignedData
and
.Vt EnvelopedData ,
such manual setup is also feasible, but it is more easily performed with
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3
or
.Xr PKCS7_encrypt 3 ,
respectively.
.Pp
.Fn PKCS7_final
is only one among several functions that can be used to finalize
.Fa p7 ;
alternatives include
.Xr SMIME_write_PKCS7 3 ,
.Xr PEM_write_bio_PKCS7_stream 3 ,
and
.Xr i2d_PKCS7_bio_stream 3 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn PKCS7_final
returns 1 on success or 0 on failure.
.Pp
Possible reasons for failure include:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset 2n -width 1n
.It
.Fa p7
is
.Dv NULL .
.It
The
.Fa content
field of
.Fa p7
is empty.
.It
The
.Fa contentType
of
.Fa p7
is unsupported.
.It
Signing or digesting is requested and
.Fa p7
is not configured to store a detached signature, but does not contain
the required field to store the content either.
.It
At least one signer lacks a usable digest algorithm.
.It
A cipher is required but none is configured.
.It
Any required operation fails, for example signing or digesting.
.It
Memory allocation fails.
.El
.Pp
Signers lacking private keys do not cause failure but are silently skipped.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3 ,
.Xr i2d_PKCS7_bio_stream 3 ,
.Xr PEM_write_bio_PKCS7_stream 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_add_attribute 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_dataFinal 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_dataInit 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3 ,
.Xr SMIME_write_PKCS7 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn PKCS7_final
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and has been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
.Sh CAVEATS
This function does not support
.Vt EncryptedData .
