.\"	$OpenBSD: PKCS7_decrypt.3,v 1.11 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2006 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS7_DECRYPT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS7_decrypt
.Nd decrypt content from a PKCS#7 envelopedData structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs7.h
.Ft int
.Fo PKCS7_decrypt
.Fa "PKCS7 *p7"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fa "X509 *cert"
.Fa "BIO *data"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn PKCS7_decrypt
extracts and decrypts the content from a PKCS#7 envelopedData structure.
.Fa pkey
is the private key of the recipient,
.Fa cert
is the recipient's certificate,
.Fa data
is a
.Vt BIO
to write the content to and
.Fa flags
is an optional set of flags.
.Pp
Although the recipient's certificate is not needed to decrypt the data,
it is needed to locate the appropriate recipients
in the PKCS#7 structure.
.Pp
If the
.Dv PKCS7_TEXT
.Fa flag
is set, MIME headers for type
.Sy text/plain
are deleted from the content.
If the content is not of type
.Sy text/plain ,
an error is returned.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn PKCS7_decrypt
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Pp
The error can be obtained from
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr PKCS7_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_new 3 ,
.Xr PKCS7_verify 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn PKCS7_decrypt
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5 and has been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
.Sh BUGS
.Fn PKCS7_decrypt
must be passed the correct recipient key and certificate.
It would be better if it could look up the correct key and certificate
from a database.
.Pp
The lack of single pass processing and need to hold all data in memory
as mentioned in
.Xr PKCS7_sign 3
also applies to
.Fn PKCS7_decrypt .
