.\"	$OpenBSD: PKCS12_parse.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2009 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt PKCS12_PARSE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PKCS12_parse
.Nd parse a PKCS#12 structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/pkcs12.h
.Ft int
.Fo PKCS12_parse
.Fa "PKCS12 *p12"
.Fa "const char *pass"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY **pkey"
.Fa "X509 **cert"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) **ca"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn PKCS12_parse
parses a PKCS12 structure.
.Pp
.Fa p12
is the
.Vt PKCS12
structure to parse.
.Fa pass
is the passphrase to use.
If successful, the private key will be written to
.Pf * Fa pkey ,
the corresponding certificate to
.Pf * Fa cert ,
and any additional certificates to
.Pf * Fa ca .
.Pp
The parameters
.Fa pkey
and
.Fa cert
cannot be
.Dv NULL .
.Fa ca
can be
.Dv NULL ,
in which case additional certificates will be discarded.
.Pf * Fa ca
can also be a valid STACK, in which case additional certificates are
appended to
.Pf * Fa ca .
If
.Pf * Fa ca
is
.Dv NULL ,
a new STACK will be allocated.
.Pp
The
.Sy friendlyName
and
.Sy localKeyID
attributes (if present) of each certificate will be stored in the
.Fa alias
and
.Fa keyid
attributes of the
.Vt X509
structure.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn PKCS12_parse
returns 1 for success and 0 if an error occurred.
.Pp
The error can be obtained from
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_PKCS12 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_create 3 ,
.Xr PKCS12_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_keyid_set1 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn PKCS12_parse
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.3 and has been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Sh BUGS
Only a single private key and corresponding certificate is returned by
this function.
More complex PKCS#12 files with multiple private keys will only return
the first match.
.Pp
Only
.Sy friendlyName
and
.Sy localKeyID
attributes are currently stored in certificates.
Other attributes are discarded.
.Pp
Attributes currently cannot be stored in the private key
.Vt EVP_PKEY
structure.
