.\"	$OpenBSD: RAND_load_file.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2001 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt RAND_LOAD_FILE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm RAND_file_name ,
.Nm RAND_load_file ,
.Nm RAND_write_file
.Nd PRNG seed file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/rand.h
.Ft const char *
.Fo RAND_file_name
.Fa "char *buf"
.Fa "size_t num"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RAND_load_file
.Fa "const char *filename"
.Fa "long max_bytes"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RAND_write_file
.Fa "const char *filename"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn RAND_file_name
returns a default path for the random seed file.
.Fa buf
points to a buffer of size
.Fa num
in which to store the filename.
If
.Fa num
is too small for the path name, an error occurs.
.Pp
.Fn RAND_load_file
used to allow for the state of the random number generator to be
controlled by external sources.
It is kept for ABI compatibility but is no longer functional, and should
not be used in new programs.
.Pp
.Fn RAND_write_file
writes a number of random bytes (currently 1024) to file
.Fa filename .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn RAND_load_file
returns
.Fa max_bytes ,
or a bogus positive value if
.Fa max_bytes
is -1.
.Pp
.Fn RAND_write_file
returns the number of bytes written, or a number less than or equal
to 1 if an error occurs.
.Pp
.Fn RAND_file_name
returns a pointer to
.Fa buf
on success or
.Dv NULL
on error.
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn RAND_load_file ,
.Fn RAND_write_file ,
and
.Fn RAND_file_name
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
