.\"	$OpenBSD: RAND_bytes.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt RAND_BYTES 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm RAND_bytes ,
.Nm RAND_pseudo_bytes
.Nd generate random data
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/rand.h
.Ft int
.Fo RAND_bytes
.Fa "unsigned char *buf"
.Fa "int num"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RAND_pseudo_bytes
.Fa "unsigned char *buf"
.Fa "int num"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions are deprecated and only retained for compatibility
with legacy application programs.
Use
.Xr arc4random_buf 3
instead.
.Pp
.Fn RAND_bytes
puts
.Fa num
cryptographically strong pseudo-random bytes into
.Fa buf .
.Pp
.Fn RAND_pseudo_bytes
puts
.Fa num
pseudo-random bytes into
.Fa buf .
Pseudo-random byte sequences generated by
.Fn RAND_pseudo_bytes
will be unique if they are of sufficient length, but are not necessarily
unpredictable.
They can be used for non-cryptographic purposes and for certain purposes
in cryptographic protocols, but usually not for key generation etc.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn RAND_bytes
returns 1.
.Fn RAND_pseudo_bytes
returns 1.
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn RAND_bytes
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
It has a return value since OpenSSL 0.9.5 and
.Ox 2.7 .
.Pp
.Fn RAND_pseudo_bytes
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5 and has been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
