.\" $OpenBSD: RIPEMD160.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 72a7a702 Feb 26 14:05:09 2019 +0000
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2006, 2014 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt RIPEMD160 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm RIPEMD160 ,
.Nm RIPEMD160_Init ,
.Nm RIPEMD160_Update ,
.Nm RIPEMD160_Final
.Nd RIPEMD-160 hash function
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/ripemd.h
.Ft unsigned char *
.Fo RIPEMD160
.Fa "const unsigned char *d"
.Fa "unsigned long n"
.Fa "unsigned char *md"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RIPEMD160_Init
.Fa "RIPEMD160_CTX *c"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RIPEMD160_Update
.Fa "RIPEMD160_CTX *c"
.Fa "const void *data"
.Fa "unsigned long len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RIPEMD160_Final
.Fa "unsigned char *md"
.Fa "RIPEMD160_CTX *c"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
RIPEMD-160 is a cryptographic hash function with a 160-bit output.
.Pp
.Fn RIPEMD160
computes the RIPEMD-160 message digest of the
.Fa n
bytes at
.Fa d
and places it in
.Fa md ,
which must have space for
.Dv RIPEMD160_DIGEST_LENGTH
== 20 bytes of output.
.Pp
The following functions may be used if the message is not completely
stored in memory:
.Pp
.Fn RIPEMD160_Init
initializes a
.Vt RIPEMD160_CTX
structure.
.Pp
.Fn RIPEMD160_Update
can be called repeatedly with chunks of the message to be hashed
.Pq Fa len No bytes at Fa data .
.Pp
.Fn RIPEMD160_Final
places the message digest in
.Fa md ,
which must have space for
.Dv RIPEMD160_DIGEST_LENGTH
== 20 bytes of output,
and erases the
.Vt RIPEMD160_CTX .
.Pp
Applications should use the higher level functions
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3
etc. instead of calling the hash functions directly.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn RIPEMD160
returns a pointer to the hash value.
.Pp
.Fn RIPEMD160_Init ,
.Fn RIPEMD160_Update ,
and
.Fn RIPEMD160_Final
return 1 for success or 0 otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3 ,
.Xr HMAC 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Bd -unfilled
ISO/IEC 10118-3:2004/Cor 1:2011
Hash-functions \(em Part 3: Dedicated hash-functions
Clause 7: RIPEMD-160
.Ed
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn RIPEMD160 ,
.Fn RIPEMD160_Init ,
.Fn RIPEMD160_Update ,
and
.Fn RIPEMD160_Final
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Sh CAVEATS
Other implementations allow
.Fa md
in
.Fn RIPEMD160
to be
.Dv NULL
and return a static array, which is not thread safe.
