.\"	$OpenBSD: RSA_public_encrypt.3,v 1.14 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL RSA_public_encrypt.pod 1e3f62a3 Jul 17 16:47:13 2017 +0200
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2004 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt RSA_PUBLIC_ENCRYPT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm RSA_public_encrypt ,
.Nm RSA_private_decrypt ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_encrypt_old ,
.Nm EVP_PKEY_decrypt_old
.Nd RSA public key cryptography
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/rsa.h
.Ft int
.Fo RSA_public_encrypt
.Fa "int flen"
.Fa "const unsigned char *from"
.Fa "unsigned char *to"
.Fa "RSA *rsa"
.Fa "int padding"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RSA_private_decrypt
.Fa "int flen"
.Fa "const unsigned char *from"
.Fa "unsigned char *to"
.Fa "RSA *rsa"
.Fa "int padding"
.Fc
.In openssl/evp.h
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_encrypt_old
.Fa "unsigned char *to"
.Fa "const unsigned char *from"
.Fa "int flen"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo EVP_PKEY_decrypt_old
.Fa "unsigned char *to"
.Fa "const unsigned char *from"
.Fa "int flen"
.Fa "EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn RSA_public_encrypt
encrypts the
.Fa flen
bytes at
.Fa from
(usually a session key) using the public key
.Fa rsa
and stores the ciphertext in
.Fa to .
.Fa to
must point to
.Fn RSA_size rsa
bytes of memory.
.Pp
.Fa padding
denotes one of the following modes:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv RSA_PKCS1_PADDING
PKCS #1 v1.5 padding.
This currently is the most widely used mode.
.It Dv RSA_PKCS1_OAEP_PADDING
EME-OAEP as defined in PKCS #1 v2.0 with SHA-1, MGF1 and an empty
encoding parameter.
This mode is recommended for all new applications.
.It Dv RSA_NO_PADDING
Raw RSA encryption.
This mode should only be used to implement cryptographically sound
padding modes in the application code.
Encrypting user data directly with RSA is insecure.
.El
.Pp
.Fa flen
must be less than
.Fn RSA_size rsa
- 11 for the PKCS #1 v1.5 based padding modes, less than
.Fn RSA_size rsa
- 41 for
.Dv RSA_PKCS1_OAEP_PADDING
and exactly
.Fn RSA_size rsa
for
.Dv RSA_NO_PADDING .
.Pp
.Fn RSA_private_decrypt
decrypts the
.Fa flen
bytes at
.Fa from
using the private key
.Fa rsa
and stores the plaintext in
.Fa to .
.Fa to
must point to a memory section large enough to hold the decrypted data
(which is smaller than
.Fn RSA_size rsa ) .
.Fa padding
is the padding mode that was used to encrypt the data.
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_encrypt_old
is a deprecated wrapper around
.Fn RSA_public_encrypt
that uses the
.Vt RSA
public key stored in
.Fa pkey
and
.Dv RSA_PKCS1_PADDING .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_decrypt_old
is a deprecated wrapper around
.Fn RSA_private_decrypt
that uses the
.Vt RSA
private key stored in
.Fa pkey
and
.Dv RSA_PKCS1_PADDING .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn RSA_public_encrypt
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_encrypt_old
return the size of the encrypted data (i.e.\&
.Fn RSA_size rsa ) .
.Fn RSA_private_decrypt
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_decrypt_old
returns the size of the recovered plaintext.
On error, \-1 is returned; the error codes can be obtained by
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Pp
In addition to the return values documented above,
.Fn EVP_PKEY_encrypt_old
may return 0 if the
.Xr EVP_PKEY_id 3
of
.Fa pkey
is not
.Dv EVP_PKEY_RSA .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr EVP_PKEY_decrypt 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr RSA_meth_set_priv_dec 3 ,
.Xr RSA_new 3 ,
.Xr RSA_size 3
.Sh STANDARDS
SSL, PKCS #1 v2.0
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn RSA_public_encrypt
and
.Fn RSA_private_decrypt
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn EVP_PKEY_encrypt
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_decrypt
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
There were renamed to
.Fn EVP_PKEY_encrypt_old
and
.Fn EVP_PKEY_decrypt_old
in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and
.Ox 4.9 .
.Pp
.Dv RSA_NO_PADDING
is available since SSLeay 0.9.0.
OAEP was added in OpenSSL 0.9.2b.
.Sh BUGS
Decryption failures in the
.Dv RSA_PKCS1_PADDING
mode leak information which can potentially be used to mount a
Bleichenbacher padding oracle attack.
This is an inherent weakness in the PKCS #1 v1.5 padding design.
Prefer
.Dv RSA_PKCS1_OAEP_PADDING .
