.\"	$OpenBSD: RSA_sign.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL aa90ca11 Aug 20 15:48:56 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2005, 2014, 2015, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt RSA_SIGN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm RSA_sign ,
.Nm RSA_verify
.Nd RSA signatures
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/rsa.h
.Ft int
.Fo RSA_sign
.Fa "int type"
.Fa "const unsigned char *m"
.Fa "unsigned int m_len"
.Fa "unsigned char *sigret"
.Fa "unsigned int *siglen"
.Fa "RSA *rsa"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RSA_verify
.Fa "int type"
.Fa "const unsigned char *m"
.Fa "unsigned int m_len"
.Fa "unsigned char *sigbuf"
.Fa "unsigned int siglen"
.Fa "RSA *rsa"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn RSA_sign
signs the message digest
.Fa m
of size
.Fa m_len
using the private key
.Fa rsa
using RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5 as specified in RFC 3447.
It stores the signature in
.Fa sigret
and the signature size in
.Fa siglen .
.Fa sigret
must point to
.Fn RSA_size rsa
bytes of memory.
Note that PKCS #1 adds meta-data, placing limits on the size of the key
that can be used.
See
.Xr RSA_private_encrypt 3
for lower-level operations.
.Pp
.Fa type
denotes the message digest algorithm that was used to generate
.Fa m .
If
.Fa type
is
.Sy NID_md5_sha1 ,
an SSL signature (MD5 and SHA-1 message digests with PKCS #1 padding and
no algorithm identifier) is created.
.Pp
.Fn RSA_verify
verifies that the signature
.Fa sigbuf
of size
.Fa siglen
matches a given message digest
.Fa m
of size
.Fa m_len .
.Fa type
denotes the message digest algorithm that was used to generate the
signature.
.Fa rsa
is the signer's public key.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn RSA_sign
returns 1 on success.
.Fn RSA_verify
returns 1 on successful verification.
.Pp
The error codes can be obtained by
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr RSA_meth_set_sign 3 ,
.Xr RSA_new 3 ,
.Xr RSA_private_encrypt 3 ,
.Xr RSA_public_decrypt 3
.Sh STANDARDS
SSL, PKCS #1 v2.0
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn RSA_sign
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.4.
.Fn RSA_verify
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0.
Both functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
