.\"	$OpenBSD: RSA_print.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2002, 2003 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt RSA_PRINT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm RSA_print ,
.Nm RSA_print_fp ,
.Nm DSAparams_print ,
.Nm DSAparams_print_fp ,
.Nm DSA_print ,
.Nm DSA_print_fp ,
.Nm DHparams_print ,
.Nm DHparams_print_fp
.Nd print cryptographic parameters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/rsa.h
.Ft int
.Fo RSA_print
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fa "RSA *x"
.Fa "int offset"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo RSA_print_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "RSA *x"
.Fa "int offset"
.Fc
.In openssl/dsa.h
.Ft int
.Fo DSAparams_print
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fa "DSA *x"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo DSAparams_print_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "DSA *x"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo DSA_print
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fa "DSA *x"
.Fa "int offset"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo DSA_print_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "DSA *x"
.Fa "int offset"
.Fc
.In openssl/dh.h
.Ft int
.Fo DHparams_print
.Fa "BIO *bp"
.Fa "DH *x"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo DHparams_print_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "DH *x"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A human-readable hexadecimal output of the components of the RSA key,
DSA parameters or key or DH parameters is printed to
.Fa bp
or
.Fa fp .
.Pp
The output lines are indented by
.Fa offset
spaces.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return 1 on success or 0 on error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BN_bn2bin 3 ,
.Xr DH_get0_pqg 3 ,
.Xr DH_new 3 ,
.Xr DSA_get0_pqg 3 ,
.Xr RSA_get0_key 3 ,
.Xr RSA_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn RSA_print
and
.Fn DHparams_print
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1.
.Fn RSA_print_fp ,
.Fn DSA_print ,
and
.Fn DHparams_print_fp
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0.
.Fn DSA_print_fp
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0.
All these functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
