.\" $OpenBSD: RSA_security_bits.3,v 1.2 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt RSA_SECURITY_BITS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm RSA_security_bits ,
.Nm DSA_security_bits ,
.Nm DH_security_bits ,
.Nm BN_security_bits
.Nd get security strength
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/rsa.h
.Ft int
.Fn RSA_security_bits "const RSA *rsa"
.In openssl/dsa.h
.Ft int
.Fn DSA_security_bits "const DSA *dsa"
.In openssl/dh.h
.Ft int
.Fn DH_security_bits "const DH *dh"
.In openssl/bn.h
.Ft int
.Fo BN_security_bits
.Fa "int pubbits"
.Fa "int privbits"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions return the security strength of some specific types of
cryptographic keys, measured in bits.
It is approximately the binary logarithm of the number of operations
an attacker has to perform in order to break the key.
.Pp
.Fn RSA_security_bits
uses only the number of significant bits in the public modulus of
.Fa rsa
as returned by
.Xr RSA_bits 3 .
It returns
.Bl -column 256 for 15360 last_column -offset indent
.It 256 Ta for Ta 15360 Ta or more significant bits
.It 192 Ta     Ta  7680 Ta
.It 128 Ta     Ta  3072 Ta
.It 112 Ta     Ta  2048 Ta
.It  80 Ta     Ta  1024 Ta
.El
.Pp
or 0 otherwise.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_security_bits
uses the number of significant bits in the public domain parameter
.Fa p
contained in the
.Fa dsa
object, which is equal to the size of the public key, in the same way as
.Fn RSA_security_bits .
In addition, the public domain parameter
.Fa q
contained in the
.Fa dsa
object, which is equal to the size of the private key, is inspected.
The return value is either the security strength according to the above table
or half the size of the private key, whichever is smaller.
If the return value would be smaller than 80, 0 is returned instead.
.Pp
.Fn DH_security_bits
uses the number of significant bits in the shared secret contained in the
.Fa dh
object as returned by
.Xr DH_bits 3
in the same way as
.Fn RSA_security_bits .
If
.Fa dh
contains the domain parameter
.Fa q ,
its number of significant bits is used in the same way as for
.Fn DSA_security_bits
to limit the return value.
Otherwise, if
.Fa dh
contains the length of the secret exponent in bits,
that number is used.
If neither is available, only the above table is used
without calculating a minimum.
.Pp
.Fn BN_security_bits
is a combined function.
If \-1 is passed for the
.Fa privbits
argument, it behaves like
.Fn RSA_security_bits .
Otherwise, it behaves like
.Fn DSA_security_bits .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
All these functions return numbers in the range from 0 to 256 inclusive.
.Pp
.Fn DSA_security_bits
fails and returns \-1 unless both of the
.Fa p
and
.Fa q
domain parameters are present.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BN_num_bits 3 ,
.Xr DH_bits 3 ,
.Xr DH_get0_pqg 3 ,
.Xr DSA_get0_pqg 3 ,
.Xr RSA_bits 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_security_level 3
.Rs
.%A Elaine Barker
.%T Recommendation for Key Management
.%I U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology
.%R NIST Special Publication 800-57 Part 1 Revision 5
.%U https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-57pt1r5
.%C Gaithersburg, MD
.%D May 2020
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0
and have been available since
.Ox 7.2 .
