.\" $OpenBSD: X25519.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" contains some text from: BoringSSL curve25519.h, curve25519.c
.\" content also checked up to: OpenSSL f929439f Mar 15 12:19:16 2018 +0000
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Google Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2018, 2022 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHORS DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" According to the BoringSSL git history, those parts of the text in
.\" the present manual page that are Copyrighted by Google were probably
.\" written by Adam Langley <agl@google.com> in 2015.
.\" I fail to see any such text in the public domain files written
.\" by Daniel J. Bernstein and others that are included in SUPERCOP
.\" and that Adam Langley's BoringSSL implementation is based on.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X25519 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X25519 ,
.Nm X25519_keypair ,
.Nm ED25519_keypair ,
.Nm ED25519_sign ,
.Nm ED25519_verify
.Nd Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman and signature primitives based on Curve25519
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/curve25519.h
.Ft int
.Fo X25519
.Fa "uint8_t out_shared_key[X25519_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fa "const uint8_t private_key[X25519_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fa "const uint8_t peer_public_value[X25519_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo X25519_keypair
.Fa "uint8_t out_public_value[X25519_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fa "uint8_t out_private_key[X25519_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ED25519_keypair
.Fa "uint8_t out_public_key[ED25519_PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fa "uint8_t out_private_key[ED25519_PRIVATE_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo ED25519_sign
.Fa "uint8_t *out_sig"
.Fa "const uint8_t *message"
.Fa "size_t message_len"
.Fa "const uint8_t public_key[ED25519_PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fa "const uint8_t private_key_seed[ED25519_PRIVATE_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo ED25519_verify
.Fa "const uint8_t *message"
.Fa "size_t message_len"
.Fa "const uint8_t signature[ED25519_SIGNATURE_LENGTH]"
.Fa "const uint8_t public_key[ED25519_PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH]"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Curve25519 is an elliptic curve over a prime field
specified in RFC 7748 section 4.1.
The prime field is defined by the prime number 2^255 - 19.
.Pp
X25519
is the Diffie-Hellman primitive built from Curve25519 as described
in RFC 7748 section 5.
Section 6.1 describes the intended use in an Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman
(ECDH) protocol.
.Pp
.Fn X25519
writes a shared key to
.Fa out_shared_key
that is calculated from the given
.Fa private_key
and the
.Fa peer_public_value
by scalar multiplication.
Do not use the shared key directly, rather use a key derivation
function and also include the two public values as inputs.
.Pp
.Fn X25519_keypair
sets
.Fa out_public_value
and
.Fa out_private_key
to a freshly generated public/private key pair.
First, the
.Fa out_private_key
is generated with
.Xr arc4random_buf 3 .
Then, the opposite of the masking described in RFC 7748 section 5
is applied to it to make sure that the generated private key is never
correctly masked.
The purpose is to cause incorrect implementations on the peer side
to consistently fail.
Correct implementations will decode the key correctly even when it is
not correctly masked.
Finally, the
.Fa out_public_value
is calculated from the
.Fa out_private_key
by multiplying it with the Montgomery base point
.Vt uint8_t u[32] No = Brq 9 .
.Pp
The size of a public and private key is
.Dv X25519_KEY_LENGTH No = 32
bytes each.
.Pp
Ed25519 is a signature scheme using a twisted Edwards curve
that is birationally equivalent to Curve25519.
.Pp
.Fn ED25519_keypair
sets
.Fa out_public_key
and
.Fa out_private_key
to a freshly generated public/private key pair.
First, the
.Fa out_private_key
is generated with
.Xr arc4random_buf 3 .
Then, the
.Fa out_public_key
is calculated from the private key.
.Pp
.Fn ED25519_sign
signs the
.Fa message
of
.Fa message_len
bytes using the
.Fa public_key
and the
.Fa private_key
and writes the signature to
.Fa out_sig .
.Pp
.Fn ED25519_verify
checks that signing the
.Fa message
of
.Fa message_len
bytes using the
.Fa public_key
would indeed result in the given
.Fa signature .
.Pp
The sizes of a public and private keys are
.Dv ED25519_PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH
and
.Dv ED25519_PRIVATE_KEY_LENGTH ,
which are both 32 bytes, and the size of a signature is
.Dv ED25519_SIGNATURE_LENGTH No = 64
bytes.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X25519
and
.Fn ED25519_sign
return 1 on success or 0 on error.
.Fn X25519
can fail if the input is a point of small order.
.Fn ED25519_sign
always succeeds in LibreSSL, but the API reserves the return value 0
for memory allocation failure.
.Pp
.Fn ED25519_verify
returns 1 if the
.Fa signature
is valid or 0 otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ECDH_compute_key 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestSign 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestVerify 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_derive 3 ,
.Xr EVP_PKEY_keygen 3
.Rs
.%A Daniel J. Bernstein
.%R A state-of-the-art Diffie-Hellman function:\
    How do I use Curve25519 in my own software?
.%U https://cr.yp.to/ecdh.html
.Re
.Rs
.%A Daniel J. Bernstein
.%A Niels Duif
.%A Tanja Lange
.%A Peter Schwabe
.%A Bo-Yin Yang
.%T High-Speed High-Security Signatures
.%B Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems \(em CHES 2011
.%I Springer
.%J Lecture Notes in Computer Science
.%V vol 6917
.%U https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23951-9_9
.%C Nara, Japan
.%D September 29, 2011
.Re
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 7748: Elliptic Curves for Security
.Pp
RFC 8032: Edwards-Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)
