.\" $OpenBSD: X509_CRL_print.3,v 1.2 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_CRL_PRINT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_CRL_print ,
.Nm X509_CRL_print_fp
.Nd pretty-print a certificate revocation list
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft int
.Fo X509_CRL_print
.Fa "BIO *bio"
.Fa "X509_CRL *crl"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_CRL_print_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "X509_CRL *crl"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_CRL_print
prints information contained in
.Fa crl
to
.Fa bio
in human-readable form, in the following order:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The certificate revocation list version number as defined by
the standard, followed in parentheses by the value contained
in the version field in hexadecimal notation.
See
.Xr X509_CRL_get_version 3
for details.
.It
The name of the signature algorithm is printed with
.Xr X509_signature_print 3 .
.It
The issuer name as returned by
.Xr X509_CRL_get_issuer 3 .
.It
The times of the last and next updates as returned by
.Xr X509_CRL_get0_lastUpdate 3
and
.Xr X509_CRL_get0_nextUpdate 3
are printed with
.Xr ASN1_TIME_print 3 .
.It
All X.509 extensions directly contained
in the certificate revocation list object
.Fa crl
are printed with
.Xr X509V3_extensions_print 3 .
.It
Information about revoked certificates is retrieved with
.Xr X509_CRL_get_REVOKED 3 ,
and for each revoked certificate, the following is printed:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The serial number of the certificate is printed with
.Xr i2a_ASN1_INTEGER 3 .
.It
The revocation date is printed with
.Xr ASN1_TIME_print 3 .
.It
All X.509 extensions contained in the revocation entry are printed with
.Xr X509V3_extensions_print 3 .
.El
.It
The signature of
.Fa crl
is printed with
.Xr X509_signature_print 3 .
.El
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_print_fp
is similar to
.Fn X509_CRL_print
except that it prints to
.Fa fp .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions are intended to return 1 for success and 0 for error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_print_ex 3 ,
.Xr X509_REVOKED_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.2 and have been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Sh BUGS
Most I/O errors are silently ignored.
Even if the information printed is incomplete, these functions may
return 1 anyway.
.Pp
If the version number is invalid, no information from the CRL is printed
and the functions fail.
