.\"	$OpenBSD: X509_get_version.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2015, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_GET_VERSION 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_get_version ,
.Nm X509_set_version ,
.Nm X509_REQ_get_version ,
.Nm X509_REQ_set_version ,
.Nm X509_CRL_get_version ,
.Nm X509_CRL_set_version
.Nd get or set certificate, certificate request, or CRL version
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft long
.Fo X509_get_version
.Fa "const X509 *x"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_set_version
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fa "long version"
.Fc
.Ft long
.Fo X509_REQ_get_version
.Fa "const X509_REQ *req"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_REQ_set_version
.Fa "X509_REQ *x"
.Fa "long version"
.Fc
.Ft long
.Fo X509_CRL_get_version
.Fa "const X509_CRL *crl"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_CRL_set_version
.Fa "X509_CRL *x"
.Fa "long version"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_get_version
returns the numerical value of the version field of certificate
.Fa x .
Note: this is defined by standards (X.509 et al.) to be one less
than the certificate version.
So a version 3 certificate will return 2 and a version 1 certificate
will return 0.
.Pp
.Fn X509_set_version
sets the numerical value of the version field of certificate
.Fa x
to
.Fa version .
.Pp
Similarly
.Fn X509_REQ_get_version ,
.Fn X509_REQ_set_version ,
.Fn X509_CRL_get_version ,
and
.Fn X509_CRL_set_version
get and set the version number of certificate requests and CRLs.
.Pp
The version field of certificates, certificate requests, and CRLs
has a DEFAULT value of v1(0) meaning the field should be omitted
for version 1.
This is handled transparently by these functions.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_get_version ,
.Fn X509_REQ_get_version ,
and
.Fn X509_CRL_get_version
return the numerical value of the version field.
.Pp
.Fn X509_set_version ,
.Fn X509_REQ_set_version ,
and
.Fn X509_CRL_set_version
return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
In some cases of failure, the reason can be determined with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_X509 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_get0_by_serial 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_pubkey 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_subject_name 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_ENTRY_get_object 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_get_index_by_NID 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_print_ex 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_sign 3 ,
.Xr X509_verify_cert 3 ,
.Xr X509V3_get_d2i 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_get_version ,
.Fn X509_set_version ,
.Fn X509_REQ_get_version ,
and
.Fn X509_REQ_set_version
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.5 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_get_version
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.2b and has been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_set_version
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and has been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
