.\"	$OpenBSD: X509_ALGOR_dup.3,v 1.24 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 4692340e Jun 7 15:49:08 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Theo Buehler <tb@openbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2015 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_ALGOR_DUP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_ALGOR_new ,
.Nm X509_ALGOR_free ,
.Nm X509_ALGOR_dup ,
.Nm X509_ALGOR_set0 ,
.Nm X509_ALGOR_get0 ,
.Nm X509_ALGOR_cmp
.Nd create, change, and inspect algorithm identifiers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft X509_ALGOR *
.Fn X509_ALGOR_new void
.Ft void
.Fn X509_ALGOR_free "X509_ALGOR *alg"
.Ft X509_ALGOR *
.Fo X509_ALGOR_dup
.Fa "X509_ALGOR *alg"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_ALGOR_set0
.Fa "X509_ALGOR *alg"
.Fa "ASN1_OBJECT *aobj"
.Fa "int ptype"
.Fa "void *pval"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo X509_ALGOR_get0
.Fa "const ASN1_OBJECT **paobj"
.Fa "int *pptype"
.Fa "const void **ppval"
.Fa "const X509_ALGOR *alg"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_ALGOR_cmp
.Fa "const X509_ALGOR *a"
.Fa "const X509_ALGOR *b"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An
.Vt X509_ALGOR
object represents an ASN.1
.Vt AlgorithmIdentifier
structure defined in RFC 5280 section 4.1.1.2.
It specifies a cryptographic
.Fa algorithm
by an ASN.1 object identifier (OID) that can be obtained from
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3 ,
together with optional algorithm-specific
.Fa parameters
of the type
.Vt ASN1_TYPE ,
see
.Xr ASN1_TYPE_set 3 .
.Vt X509_ALGOR
objects are used by many other objects, for example certificates,
certificate revocation lists, and certificate requests.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_new
allocates a new
.Vt X509_ALGOR
object containing the object that
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3
returns for
.Dv NID_undef
as the
.Fa algorithm
and a
.Dv NULL
pointer as the
.Fa parameters .
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_free
frees
.Fa alg
and any data contained in it.
If
.Fa alg
is
.Dv NULL ,
no action occurs.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_dup
creates a deep copy of
.Fa alg .
It is implemented by calling
.Xr ASN1_item_dup 3
with arguments of
.Dv X509_ALGOR_it
and
.Fa alg ,
which is equivalent to calling
.Xr i2d_X509_ALGOR 3
and
.Xr d2i_X509_ALGOR 3 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_set0
sets the algorithm OID of
.Fa alg
to
.Fa aobj
and the associated parameter type to
.Fa ptype
with value
.Fa pval .
If
.Fa ptype
is
.Dv V_ASN1_UNDEF ,
the parameter is omitted and
.Fa pval
is ignored.
If
.Fa ptype
is zero,
.Fa pval
is ignored and the existing parameter is left unchanged, or if
.Fa alg
does not contain a parameter, a new, empty parameter of type
.Dv V_ASN1_UNDEF
is added.
Otherwise
.Fa ptype
and
.Fa pval
have the same meaning as the
.Fa type
and
.Fa value
parameters to
.Xr ASN1_TYPE_set 3 .
Ownership of
.Fa aobj
and, unless it is ignored, of
.Fa pval
is transferred to
.Fa alg
on success.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_get0
returns
.Fa alg Ns 's
algorithm OID in
.Pf * Fa paobj ,
its parameter type in
.Pf * Fa pptype ,
and its parameter value in
.Pf * Fa ppval .
Any of
.Fa paobj ,
.Fa pptype ,
and
.Fa ppval
can be
.Dv NULL .
If
.Fa pptype is
.Dv NULL
or if
.Pf * Fa pptype
is
.Dv V_ASN1_UNDEF
then
.Pf * Fa ppval Ns 's
value is undefined.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_cmp
compares
.Fa a
and
.Fa b .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_ALGOR_new
and
.Fn X509_ALGOR_dup
return a new
.Vt X509_ALGOR
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_set0
returns 1 for success or 0 if
.Fa alg
is
.Dv NULL
or memory allocation fails.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_cmp
returns 0 if
.Fa a
and
.Fa b
have identical encodings or non-zero otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASN1_TYPE_set 3 ,
.Xr d2i_X509_ALGOR 3 ,
.Xr EVP_DigestInit 3 ,
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3 ,
.Xr X509_get0_signature 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_PUBKEY_get0_param 3 ,
.Xr X509_signature_dump 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5280: Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_ALGOR_new
and
.Fn X509_ALGOR_free
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_dup
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.1 and has been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_set0
and
.Fn X509_ALGOR_get0
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8h and have been available since
.Ox 4.5 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_ALGOR_cmp
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8zd, 1.0.0p, and 1.0.1k
and has been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
