.\" $OpenBSD: X509_CRL_get0_by_serial.3,v 1.14 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL cdd6c8c5 Mar 20 12:29:37 2017 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2015, 2017 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_CRL_GET0_BY_SERIAL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_CRL_get0_by_serial ,
.Nm X509_CRL_get0_by_cert ,
.Nm X509_CRL_get_REVOKED ,
.Nm X509_CRL_add0_revoked ,
.Nm X509_CRL_sort
.Nd add, sort, and retrieve CRL entries
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft int
.Fo X509_CRL_get0_by_serial
.Fa "X509_CRL *crl"
.Fa "X509_REVOKED **ret"
.Fa "ASN1_INTEGER *serial"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_CRL_get0_by_cert
.Fa "X509_CRL *crl"
.Fa "X509_REVOKED **ret"
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fc
.Ft STACK_OF(X509_REVOKED) *
.Fo X509_CRL_get_REVOKED
.Fa "X509_CRL *crl"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_CRL_add0_revoked
.Fa "X509_CRL *crl"
.Fa "X509_REVOKED *rev"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_CRL_sort
.Fa "X509_CRL *crl"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_CRL_get0_by_serial
attempts to find a revoked entry in
.Fa crl
for serial number
.Fa serial .
If it is successful, it sets
.Pf * Fa ret
to the internal pointer of the matching entry.
Consequently,
.Pf * Fa ret
must not be freed up after the call.
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_get0_by_cert
is similar to
.Fn X509_CRL_get0_by_serial
except that it looks for a revoked entry using the serial number
of certificate
.Fa x .
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_get_REVOKED
returns an internal pointer to a stack of all revoked entries for
.Fa crl .
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_add0_revoked
appends revoked entry
.Fa rev
to CRL
.Fa crl .
The pointer
.Fa rev
is used internally so it must not be freed up after the call: it is
freed when the parent CRL is freed.
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_sort
sorts the revoked entries of
.Fa crl
into ascending serial number order.
.Pp
Applications can determine the number of revoked entries returned by
.Fn X509_CRL_get_revoked
using
.Fn sk_X509_REVOKED_num
and examine each one in turn using
.Fn sk_X509_REVOKED_value ,
both defined in
.In openssl/safestack.h .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_CRL_get0_by_serial
and
.Fn X509_CRL_get0_by_cert
return 0 for failure or 1 for success, except if the revoked entry
has the reason
.Qq removeFromCRL ,
in which case 2 is returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn X509_CRL_add0_revoked
function returns 1 if successful;
otherwise 0 is returned and an error code can be retrieved with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_sort
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
The current implementation cannot fail.
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_get_REVOKED
returns a STACK of revoked entries.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_X509_CRL 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_get_ext 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_get_issuer 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_get_version 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_REVOKED_new 3 ,
.Xr X509V3_get_d2i 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_CRL_get_REVOKED
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.2b and has been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_add0_revoked
and
.Fn X509_CRL_sort
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_CRL_get0_by_serial
and
.Fn X509_CRL_get0_by_cert
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
