.\" $OpenBSD: X509_STORE_new.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 05ea606a May 20 20:52:46 2016 -0400
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by
.\" Alessandro Ghedini <alessandro@ghedini.me>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_STORE_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_STORE_new ,
.Nm X509_STORE_up_ref ,
.Nm X509_STORE_free
.Nd allocate and free X.509 certificate stores
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509_vfy.h
.Ft X509_STORE *
.Fn X509_STORE_new void
.Ft int
.Fo X509_STORE_up_ref
.Fa "X509_STORE *store"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo X509_STORE_free
.Fa "X509_STORE *store"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_STORE_new
allocates and initializes an empty X.509 certificate store
and sets its reference count to 1.
.Pp
.Fn X509_STORE_up_ref
increments the reference count of
.Fa store
by 1.
.Pp
.Fn X509_STORE_free
decrements the reference count of
.Fa store
by 1.
If the reference count reaches 0,
all resources used by the store, including all certificates
contained in it, are released and
.Fa store
itself is freed.
If
.Fa store
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, no action occurs.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_STORE_new
returns a newly created
.Vt X509_STORE
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Pp
.Fn X509_STORE_up_ref
returns 1 for success and 0 for failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr PKCS7_verify 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_cert_store 3 ,
.Xr X509_load_cert_file 3 ,
.Xr X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir 3 ,
.Xr X509_OBJECT_get0_X509 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_CTX_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_load_locations 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_set1_param 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_set_verify_cb 3 ,
.Xr X509_verify_cert 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_STORE_new
and
.Fn X509_STORE_free
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_STORE_up_ref
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
