.\" $OpenBSD: X509v3_addr_inherits.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Theo Buehler <tb@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509V3_ADDR_INHERITS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509v3_addr_inherits ,
.Nm X509v3_asid_inherits
.Nd RFC 3779 inheritance
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509v3.h
.Ft int
.Fn X509v3_addr_inherits "IPAddrBlocks *addrblocks"
.Ft int
.Fn X509v3_asid_inherits "ASIdentifiers *asids"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509v3_addr_inherits
determines if there is at least one address family in
.Fa addrblocks
that uses inheritance.
.Pp
.Fn X509v3_asid_inherits
is intended to determine if at least one of
the list of autonomous system numbers or
the list of routing domain identifiers
uses inheritance.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509v3_addr_inherits
returns 1 if and only if
.Fa addrblocks
contains at least one
.Fa IPAddressFamily
object that is correctly marked
.Dq inherit :
its
.Fa IPAddressChoice
is of
.Fa type
.Dv IPAddressChoice_inherit
and its
.Fa inherit
element is present.
Otherwise it returns 0.
.Pp
.Fn X509v3_asid_inherits
returns 1 if and only if
at least one of the
.Fa asnum
or the
.Fa rdi
lists has
.Fa type
.Dv ASIdentifierChoice_inherit .
Otherwise it returns 0.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASIdentifiers_new 3 ,
.Xr ASRange_new 3 ,
.Xr crypto 3 ,
.Xr IPAddressRange_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_add_inherit 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_asid_add_inherit 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 3779: X.509 Extensions for IP Addresses and AS Identifiers:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
section 2: IP Address delegation extension
.It
section 2.2.3.5: Element inherit
.It
section 3: AS identifiers delegation extension
.It
section 3.2.3.3: Element inherit
.El
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8e
and have been available since
.Ox 7.1 .
.Sh BUGS
.Fn X509v3_asid_inherits
ignores whether the
.Fa inherit
element is present or absent in the list that is considered to use inheritance.
.Pp
There is no API that determines whether all lists contained in an
.Vt ASIdentifiers
or an
.Vt IPAddrBlocks
object inherit.
See RFC 9287, 5.1.2 for an example where this is relevant.
