.\" $OpenBSD: X509_REQ_print_ex.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:30:52 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_REQ_PRINT_EX 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_REQ_print_ex ,
.Nm X509_REQ_print ,
.Nm X509_REQ_print_fp
.Nd pretty-print a PKCS#10 certification request
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft int
.Fo X509_REQ_print_ex
.Fa "BIO *bio"
.Fa "X509_REQ *req"
.Fa "unsigned long nameflags"
.Fa "unsigned long skipflags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_REQ_print
.Fa "BIO *bio"
.Fa "X509_REQ *req"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_REQ_print_fp
.Fa "FILE *fp"
.Fa "X509_REQ *req"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_REQ_print_ex
prints information contained in
.Fa req
to
.Fa bio
in human-readable form.
Printing is aborted as soon as any operation fails, with the exception
that failures while attempting to decode or print the public key
are not considered as errors.
.Pp
By default, the following blocks of information
are printed in the following order.
Each block can be skipped by setting the corresponding bit in
.Fa skipflags ,
provided in parentheses after each block description.
.Bl -bullet
.It
A pair of lines reading
.Qq Certificate Request:\&
and
.Qq Data:\&
containing no information.
.Pq Dv X509_FLAG_NO_HEADER
.It
The value contained in the version field
in decimal and hexadecimal notation.
.Pq Dv X509_FLAG_NO_VERSION
.It
The subject name is printed with
.Xr X509_NAME_print_ex 3 .
.Pq Dv X509_FLAG_NO_SUBJECT
.It
The public key algorithm is printed with
.Xr i2a_ASN1_OBJECT 3 ,
and the public key returned from
.Xr X509_REQ_get_pubkey 3
with
.Xr EVP_PKEY_print_public 3 .
.Pq Dv X509_FLAG_NO_PUBKEY
.It
For each X.501 attribute that is not a requested extension according to
.Xr X509_REQ_extension_nid 3 ,
the object identifier is printed with
.Xr i2a_ASN1_OBJECT 3 ,
and all values of the types
.Dv V_ASN1_PRINTABLESTRING ,
.Dv V_ASN1_T61STRING ,
and
.Dv V_ASN1_IA5STRING
are printed with
.Xr BIO_write 3 .
.Pq Dv X509_FLAG_NO_ATTRIBUTES
.It
The requested extensions are retrieved with
.Xr X509_REQ_get_extensions 3
and their types and values are printed with
.Xr i2a_ASN1_OBJECT 3
and
.Xr X509V3_EXT_print 3 ,
or, if the latter fails, with
.Xr ASN1_STRING_print 3 .
.Pq Dv X509_FLAG_NO_EXTENSIONS
.It
The signature is printed with
.Xr X509_signature_print 3 .
.Pq Dv X509_FLAG_NO_SIGDUMP
.El
.Pp
The
.Fa nameflags
argument modifies the format for printing X.501
.Vt Name
objects contained in
.Fa req .
It is passed through to
.Xr X509_NAME_print_ex 3 .
If
.Fa nameflags
is
.Dv X509_FLAG_COMPAT ,
the
.Fa indent
argument of
.Xr X509_NAME_print_ex 3
is set to 16 spaces and the traditional SSLeay format is used.
Otherwise, if the only bit set in
.Dv XN_FLAG_SEP_MASK
is
.Dv XN_FLAG_SEP_MULTILINE ,
.Fa indent
is set to 12 spaces.
Otherwise, indent is set to zero.
.Pp
.Fn X509_REQ_print
is a wrapper function setting the
.Fa nameflags
to
.Dv XN_FLAG_COMPAT
and the
.Fa skipflags
to
.Dv X509_FLAG_COMPAT .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REQ_print_fp
is similar to
.Fn X509_REQ_print
except that it prints to
.Fa fp .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return 1 if all requested information was successfully
printed, even if failures occurred while attempting to decode or
print the public key, or 0 if any operation fails.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_print_ex 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_REQ_print
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.4 and
.Fn X509_REQ_print_fp
in SSLeay 0.6.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REQ_print_ex
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and has been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Sh BUGS
Some printing failures are silently ignored while printing extensions,
which may result in incomplete data being printed.
