.\" $OpenBSD: X509_NAME_hash.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_NAME_HASH 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_NAME_hash ,
.Nm X509_issuer_name_hash ,
.Nm X509_subject_name_hash ,
.\" X509_issuer_and_serial_hash() is intentionally undocumented
.\" because it uses MD5 only and is unused in real-world code.
.Nm X509_NAME_hash_old ,
.Nm X509_issuer_name_hash_old ,
.Nm X509_subject_name_hash_old
.\" In the following line, "X.501" and "Name" are not typos.
.\" The "Name" type is defined in X.501, not in X.509.
.\" The type is called "Name" with capital "N", not "name".
.Nd calculate SHA-1 or MD5 hashes of X.501 Name objects
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft unsigned long
.Fn X509_NAME_hash "X509_NAME *name"
.Ft unsigned long
.Fn X509_issuer_name_hash "X509 *x"
.Ft unsigned long
.Fn X509_subject_name_hash "X509 *x"
.Ft unsigned long
.Fn X509_NAME_hash_old "X509_NAME *name"
.Ft unsigned long
.Fn X509_issuer_name_hash_old "X509 *x"
.Ft unsigned long
.Fn X509_subject_name_hash_old "X509 *x"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_NAME_hash
calculates an
.Xr SHA1 3
hash of the DER-encoded form of
.Fa name .
It is for example used by
.Xr X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir 3
to locate certificate files in the file system.
.Pp
.Fn X509_issuer_name_hash
and
.Fn X509_subject_name_hash
are wrappers to calculate this hash of the issuer or subject name of
.Fa x ,
respectively.
.Pp
.Fn X509_NAME_hash_old ,
.Fn X509_issuer_name_hash_old ,
and
.Fn X509_subject_name_hash_old
are variants that use MD5 instead of SHA-1.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return the hash value or 0 if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr i2d_X509_NAME 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_subject_name 3 ,
.Xr X509_LOOKUP_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_digest 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_subject_name_hash
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.0,
.Fn X509_issuer_name_hash
in SSLeay 0.5.1, and
.Fn X509_NAME_hash
in SSLeay 0.8.0.
They were switched to hashing the DER representation of the name
rather than an ASCII rendering in SSLeay 0.9.0 and have all been
available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
They were switched to using SHA-1 instead of MD5 in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and in
.Ox 4.9 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_NAME_hash_old ,
.Fn X509_issuer_name_hash_old ,
and
.Fn X509_subject_name_hash_old
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
