.\" $OpenBSD: X509v3_addr_validate_path.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Theo Buehler <tb@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509V3_ADDR_VALIDATE_PATH 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509v3_addr_validate_path ,
.Nm X509v3_addr_validate_resource_set ,
.Nm X509v3_asid_validate_path ,
.Nm X509v3_asid_validate_resource_set
.Nd RFC 3779 path validation for IP address and AS number delegation
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509v3.h
.Ft int
.Fn X509v3_addr_validate_path "X509_STORE_CTX *ctx"
.Ft int
.Fo X509v3_addr_validate_resource_set
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *chain"
.Fa "IPAddrBlocks *addrblocks"
.Fa "int allow_inherit"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn X509v3_asid_validate_path "X509_STORE_CTX *ctx"
.Ft int
.Fo X509v3_asid_validate_resource_set
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *chain"
.Fa "ASIdentifiers *asid"
.Fa "int allow_inherit"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Both RFC 3779 extensions require additional checking in the certification
path validation.
.Bl -enum
.It
The initial set of allowed IP address and AS number resources is defined in
the trust anchor, where inheritance is not allowed.
.It
An issuer may only delegate subsets of resources present in its
RFC 3779 extensions or subsets of resources inherited from its issuer.
.It
If an RFC 3779 extension is present in a certificate,
the same type of extension must also be present in its issuer.
.It
All RFC 3779 extensions
appearing in the validation path must be in canonical form
according to
.Xr X509v3_addr_is_canonical 3
and
.Xr X509v3_asid_is_canonical 3 .
.El
.Pp
.Fn X509v3_addr_validate_path
and
.Fn X509v3_asid_validate_path
are called from
.Xr X509_verify_cert 3
as part of the verification chain building.
On encountering an error or a violation of the above rules,
.Fa error ,
.Fa error_depth ,
and
.Fa current_cert
are set on
.Fa ctx
and the verify callback is called with
.Fa ok
set to 0.
.Dv X509_V_ERR_INVALID_EXTENSION
indicates a non-canonical resource,
.Dv X509_V_ERR_UNNESTED_RESOURCE
indicates a violation of the other rules above.
In rare circumstances, the error can be
.Dv X509_V_ERR_UNSPECIFIED
and for IP address resources
.Dv X509_V_ERR_OUT_OF_MEM
is also possible.
.Pp
.Fn X509v3_addr_validate_resource_set
validates the resources in
.Fa addrblocks
against a specific certificate
.Fa chain .
After checking that
.Fa addrblocks
is canonical, its IP addresses are checked to be covered in
the certificate at depth 0,
then the chain is walked all the way to the trust anchor
until an error or a violation of the above rules is encountered.
.Fa addrblocks
is allowed to use inheritance according to
.Xr X509v3_addr_inherits 3
if and only if
.Fa allow_inherit
is non-zero.
.Pp
.Fn X509v3_asid_validate_resource_set
performs similar checks as
.Fn X509v3_addr_validate_resource_set
for
.Fa asid .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
All these functions return 1 on successful validation and 0 otherwise.
.Pp
For
.Fn X509v3_addr_validate_path
and
.Fn X509v3_asid_validate_path
a non-empty
.Fa chain
and a
.Fa verify_cb
must be present on
.Fa ctx ,
otherwise they fail and set the
.Fa error
on
.Fa ctx
to
.Dv X509_V_ERR_UNSPECIFIED .
The
.Fa verify_cb
is called with the error codes described above
on most errors encountered during validation.
Some malformed extensions can lead to an error
that cannot be intercepted by the callback.
With the exception of an allocation error,
no error codes are set on the error stack.
.Pp
.Fn X509v3_addr_validate_resource_set
accepts a
.Dv NULL
.Fa addrblocks
and
.Fn X509v3_asid_validate_resource_set
accepts a
.Dv NULL
.Fa asid
as valid.
They fail if
.Fa chain
is
.Dv NULL
or empty.
If
.Fa allow_inherit
is 0,
.Fa addrblocks
or
.Fa asid
is checked for inheritance with
.Xr X509v3_addr_inherits 3
or
.Xr X509v3_asid_inherits 3 .
The remaining failure cases are the same as for
.Fn X509v3_addr_validate_path
and
.Fn X509v3_asid_validate_path .
They cannot and do not attempt to communicate
the cause of the error to the caller.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASIdentifiers_new 3 ,
.Xr crypto 3 ,
.Xr IPAddressRange_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_CTX_get_error 3 ,
.Xr X509_verify_cert 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_add_inherit 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_addr_inherits 3 ,
.Xr X509v3_asid_add_id_or_range 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 3779: X.509 Extensions for IP Addresses and AS Identifiers:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
section 2.3: IP Address Delegation Extension Certification Path Validation
.It
section 3.3: Autonomous System Identifier Delegation Extension Certification
Path Validation
.El
.Pp
RFC 5280: Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate
and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
section 6: Certification Path Validation
.El
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8e
and have been available since
.Ox 7.1 .
