.\" $OpenBSD: X509_get_serialNumber.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL df75c2bf Dec 9 01:02:36 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_GET_SERIALNUMBER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_get_serialNumber ,
.Nm X509_get0_serialNumber ,
.Nm X509_set_serialNumber
.Nd get or set certificate serial number
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft ASN1_INTEGER *
.Fo X509_get_serialNumber
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fc
.Ft const ASN1_INTEGER *
.Fo X509_get0_serialNumber
.Fa "const X509 *x"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_set_serialNumber
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fa "ASN1_INTEGER *serial"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_get_serialNumber
returns the serial number of certificate
.Fa x
as an
.Vt ASN1_INTEGER
structure which can be examined or initialised.
The value returned is an internal pointer which must not be freed
up after the call.
.Pp
.Fn X509_get0_serialNumber
does the same except that it accepts a constant argument
and returns a constant result.
.Pp
.Fn X509_set_serialNumber
sets the serial number of certificate
.Fa x
to
.Fa serial .
A copy of the serial number is used internally so
.Fa serial
should be freed up after use.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_get_serialNumber
and
.Fn X509_get0_serialNumber
return a pointer to an
.Vt ASN1_INTEGER
structure.
.Pp
.Fn X509_set_serialNumber
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
In some cases of failure, the reason can be determined with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_X509 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_get0_by_serial 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_pubkey 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_ENTRY_get_object 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_get_index_by_NID 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_print_ex 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_sign 3 ,
.Xr X509_verify_cert 3 ,
.Xr X509V3_get_d2i 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_get_serialNumber
and
.Fn X509_set_serialNumber
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.5 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_get0_serialNumber
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 6.4 .
