.\" $OpenBSD: X509_REQ_new.3,v 1.12 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016, 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_REQ_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_REQ_new ,
.Nm X509_REQ_dup ,
.Nm X509_to_X509_REQ ,
.Nm X509_REQ_free ,
.Nm X509_REQ_INFO_new ,
.Nm X509_REQ_INFO_free
.Nd PKCS#10 certification requests
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft X509_REQ *
.Fn X509_REQ_new void
.Ft X509_REQ *
.Fn X509_REQ_dup "X509_REQ *req"
.Ft X509_REQ *
.Fn X509_to_X509_REQ "X509 *x" "EVP_PKEY *pkey" "const EVP_MD *md"
.Ft void
.Fn X509_REQ_free "X509_REQ *req"
.Ft X509_REQ_INFO *
.Fn X509_REQ_INFO_new void
.Ft void
.Fn X509_REQ_INFO_free "X509_REQ_INFO *req_info"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_REQ_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt X509_REQ
object, representing an ASN.1
.Vt CertificationRequest
structure defined in RFC 2986 section 4.2.
It can hold a pointer to an
.Vt X509_REQ_INFO
object discussed below together with a cryptographic signature and
information about the signature algorithm used.
.Pp
.Fn X509_REQ_dup
creates a deep copy of
.Fa req
using
.Xr ASN1_item_dup 3 ,
setting the reference count of the copy to 1.
.Pp
.Fn X509_to_X509_REQ
allocates a new certification request object, copies
the subject name and the public key into it from the certificate
.Fa x ,
and sets the version to zero.
Unless
.Fa pkey
is
.Dv NULL ,
it also signs the request with
.Xr X509_REQ_sign 3
using
.Fa pkey
and
.Fa md .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REQ_free
frees
.Fa req .
If
.Fa req
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, no action occurs.
.Pp
.Fn X509_REQ_INFO_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt X509_REQ_INFO
object, representing an ASN.1
.Vt CertificationRequestInfo
structure defined in RFC 2986 section 4.1.
It is used inside the
.Vt X509_REQ
object and can hold the subject and the public key of the requested
certificate and additional attributes.
.Fn X509_REQ_INFO_free
frees
.Fa req_info .
If
.Fa req_info
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, no action occurs.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_REQ_new ,
.Fn X509_REQ_dup ,
.Fn X509_to_X509_REQ ,
and
.Fn X509_REQ_INFO_new
return the new
.Vt X509_REQ
or
.Vt X509_REQ_INFO
object, respectively, or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_X509_REQ 3 ,
.Xr PEM_read_X509_REQ 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_add1_attr 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_add_extensions 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_check_private_key 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_digest 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_get0_signature 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_get_pubkey 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_get_subject_name 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_get_version 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_print_ex 3 ,
.Xr X509_REQ_sign 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 2986: PKCS #10: Certification Request Syntax Specification
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_REQ_new ,
.Fn X509_REQ_free ,
.Fn X509_REQ_INFO_new ,
and
.Fn X509_REQ_INFO_free
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.4,
.Fn X509_REQ_dup
in SSLeay 0.5.1, and
.Fn X509_to_X509_REQ
in SSLeay 0.6.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
