.\" $OpenBSD: X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_object.3,v 1.3 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_ATTRIBUTE_GET0_OBJECT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_object ,
.Nm X509_ATTRIBUTE_count ,
.Nm X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_type ,
.Nm X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_data
.\" In the following line, "X.501" and "Attribute" are not typos.
.\" The "Attribute" type is defined in X.501, not in X.509.
.\" The type is called "Attribute" with capital "A", not "attribute".
.Nd X.501 Attribute read accessors
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft ASN1_OBJECT *
.Fo X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_object
.Fa "X509_ATTRIBUTE *attr"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_ATTRIBUTE_count
.Fa "const X509_ATTRIBUTE *attr"
.Fc
.Ft ASN1_TYPE *
.Fo X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_type
.Fa "X509_ATTRIBUTE *attr"
.Fa "int index"
.Fc
.Ft void *
.Fo X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_data
.Fa "X509_ATTRIBUTE *attr"
.Fa "int index"
.Fa "int type"
.Fa "void *data"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions provide read access to the X.501 Attribute object
.Fa attr .
.Pp
For
.Fn X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_data ,
the
.Fa type
argument usually is one of the
.Dv V_ASN1_*
constants defined in
.In openssl/asn1.h .
For example, if a return value of the type
.Vt ASN1_OCTET_STRING
is expected, pass
.Dv V_ASN1_OCTET_STRING
as the
.Fa type
argument.
The
.Fa data
argument is ignored; passing
.Dv NULL
is recommended.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_object
returns an internal pointer to the type of
.Fa attr
or
.Dv NULL
if
.Fa attr
is
.Dv NULL
or if its type is not set.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ATTRIBUTE_count
returns the number of values stored in
.Fa attr
or 0 if no value or values are set.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_type
returns an internal pointer to the ASN.1 ANY object
representing the value with the given zero-based
.Fa index
or
.Dv NULL
if
.Fa attr
is
.Dv NULL ,
if the
.Fa index
is larger than or equal to the number of values stored in
.Fa attr ,
or if no value or values are set.
.Pp
.Fn X509_ATTRIBUTE_get0_data
returns an internal pointer to the data
contained in the value with the given zero-based
.Fa index
or
.Dv NULL
if
.Fa attr
is
.Dv NULL ,
if the
.Fa index
is larger than or equal to the number of values stored in
.Fa attr ,
if no value or values are set,
or if the ASN.1 ANY object representing the value with the given
.Fa index
is not of the requested
.Fa type .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASN1_OBJECT_new 3 ,
.Xr ASN1_TYPE_new 3 ,
.Xr OPENSSL_sk_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_ATTRIBUTE_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_ATTRIBUTE_set1_object 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5
and have been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
