.\" $OpenBSD: X509_REVOKED_new.3,v 1.13 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to:
.\" OpenSSL man3/X509_CRL_get0_by_serial cdd6c8c5 Mar 20 12:29:37 2017 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_REVOKED_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_REVOKED_new ,
.Nm X509_REVOKED_dup ,
.Nm X509_REVOKED_free ,
.Nm X509_REVOKED_get0_serialNumber ,
.Nm X509_REVOKED_get0_revocationDate ,
.Nm X509_REVOKED_set_serialNumber ,
.Nm X509_REVOKED_set_revocationDate
.Nd create, change, and inspect an X.509 CRL revoked entry
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft X509_REVOKED *
.Fn X509_REVOKED_new void
.Ft X509_REVOKED *
.Fo X509_REVOKED_dup
.Fa "X509_REVOKED *r"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn X509_REVOKED_free "X509_REVOKED *r"
.Ft const ASN1_INTEGER *
.Fo X509_REVOKED_get0_serialNumber
.Fa "const X509_REVOKED *r"
.Fc
.Ft const ASN1_TIME *
.Fo X509_REVOKED_get0_revocationDate
.Fa "const X509_REVOKED *r"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_REVOKED_set_serialNumber
.Fa "X509_REVOKED *r"
.Fa "ASN1_INTEGER *serial"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_REVOKED_set_revocationDate
.Fa "X509_REVOKED *r"
.Fa "ASN1_TIME *tm"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_REVOKED_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt X509_REVOKED
object, representing one of the elements of
the revokedCertificates field of the ASN.1
.Vt TBSCertList
structure defined in RFC 5280 section 5.1.
It is used by
.Vt X509_CRL
objects and can hold information about one revoked certificate
including issuer names, serial number, revocation date, and revocation
reason.
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_dup
creates a deep copy of
.Fa r .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_free
frees
.Fa r .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_set_serialNumber
sets the serial number of
.Fa r
to
.Fa serial .
The supplied
.Fa serial
pointer is not used internally so it should be freed up after use.
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_set_revocationDate
sets the revocation date of
.Fa r
to
.Fa tm .
The supplied
.Fa tm
pointer is not used internally so it should be freed up after use.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn X509_REVOKED_new
function returns the new
.Vt X509_REVOKED
object if successful; otherwise
.Dv NULL
is returned and an error code can be retrieved with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_dup
return the new
.Vt X509_REVOKED
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurs.
In some cases of failure, the reason can be determined with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_get0_serialNumber
returns an internal pointer to the serial number of
.Fa r .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_get0_revocationDate
returns an internal pointer to the revocation date of
.Fa r .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_set_serialNumber
and
.Fn X509_REVOKED_set_revocationDate
return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
In some cases of failure, the reason can be determined with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_X509_CRL 3 ,
.Xr PEM_read_X509_CRL 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_get0_by_serial 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_CRL_print 3 ,
.Xr X509_EXTENSION_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_REVOKED_get_ext 3 ,
.Xr X509_REVOKED_get_ext_d2i 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5280: Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile, section 5.1: CRL Fields
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_REVOKED_new
and
.Fn X509_REVOKED_free
first appeared in SSLeay 0.4.4 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_set_serialNumber
and
.Fn X509_REVOKED_set_revocationDate
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.7 and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_REVOKED_dup
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.2.
.Fn X509_REVOKED_get0_serialNumber
and
.Fn X509_REVOKED_get0_revocationDate
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
