.\" $OpenBSD: X509_NAME_new.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_NAME_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_NAME_new ,
.Nm X509_NAME_free
.\" In the following line, "X.501" and "Name" are not typos.
.\" The "Name" type is defined in X.501, not in X.509.
.\" The type in called "Name" with capital "N", not "name".
.Nd X.501 Name object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft X509_NAME *
.Fn X509_NAME_new void
.Ft void
.Fn X509_NAME_free "X509_NAME *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An X.501
.Vt Name
is an ordered sequence of relative distinguished names.
A relative distinguished name is a set of key-value pairs; see
.Xr X509_NAME_ENTRY_new 3
for details.
.Pp
Various X.509 structures contain X.501
.Vt Name
substructures.
They are for example used for the issuers of certificates and
certificate revocation lists and for the subjects of certificates
and certificate requests.
.Pp
.Fn X509_NAME_new
allocates and initializes an empty
.Vt X509_NAME
object, representing an ASN.1
.Vt Name
structure defined in RFC 5280 section 4.1.2.4.
Data can be added to such objects with the functions described in
.Xr X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt 3 ,
and they can be inspected with the functions described in
.Xr X509_NAME_get_index_by_NID 3 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_NAME_free
frees
.Fa name
and all the
.Vt X509_NAME_ENTRY
objects contained in it.
If
.Fa name
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, no action occurs.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_NAME_new
returns a new
.Vt X509_NAME
object or
.Dv NULL
if an error occurred.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr d2i_X509_NAME 3 ,
.Xr GENERAL_NAME_new 3 ,
.Xr NAME_CONSTRAINTS_new 3 ,
.Xr SSL_load_client_CA_file 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_subject_name 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_cmp 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_digest 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_ENTRY_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_get_index_by_NID 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_hash 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_print_ex 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3
.Sh STANDARDS
RFC 5280: Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile
.Pp
ITU-T Recommendation X.501, also known as ISO/IEC 9594-2:
Information Technology \(en Open Systems Interconnection \(en
The Directory: Models, section 9: Names
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_NAME_new
and
.Fn X509_NAME_free
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
