.\" $OpenBSD: X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir.3,v 1.14 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 61f805c1 Jan 16 01:01:46 2018 +0800
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL 24a535ea Sep 22 13:14:20 2020 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Victor B. Wagner <vitus@cryptocom.ru>
.\" and Claus Assmann.
.\" Copyright (c) 2015, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_LOOKUP_HASH_DIR 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir ,
.Nm X509_LOOKUP_file ,
.Nm X509_LOOKUP_mem
.Nd certificate lookup methods
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509_vfy.h
.Ft const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir void
.Ft const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_file void
.Ft const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_mem void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir ,
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_file ,
and
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_mem
return pointers to static certificate lookup method objects
built into the library, for use with
.Vt X509_STORE .
.Pp
Users of the library typically do not need
to retrieve pointers to these method objects manually.
They are automatically used by the
.Xr X509_STORE_load_locations 3
or
.Xr SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations 3
functions.
.Ss File Method
The
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_file
method loads all the certificates or CRLs present in a file into memory
at the time the file is added as a lookup source.
.Pp
The file format is ASCII text which contains concatenated PEM
certificates and CRLs.
.Pp
This method should be used by applications which work with a small set
of CAs.
.Ss Hashed Directory Method
.Fa X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir
is a more advanced method which loads certificates and CRLs on demand,
and caches them in memory once they are loaded.
As of OpenSSL 1.0.0, it also checks for newer CRLs upon each lookup, so
that newer CRLs are used as soon as they appear in the directory.
.Pp
The directory should contain one certificate or CRL per file in PEM
format, with a filename of the form
.Ar hash . Ns Ar N
for a certificate, or
.Ar hash . Ns Sy r Ns Ar N
for a CRL.
The
.Ar hash
is the value returned by the
.Xr X509_NAME_hash 3
function applied to the subject name for certificates or issuer
name for CRLs.
The hash can also be obtained via the
.Fl hash
option of the
.Xr openssl 1
.Cm x509
or
.Cm crl
commands.
.Pp
The
.Ar N
suffix is a sequence number that starts at zero and is incremented
consecutively for each certificate or CRL with the same
.Ar hash
value.
Gaps in the sequence numbers are not supported.
It is assumed that there are no more objects with the same hash
beyond the first missing number in the sequence.
.Pp
Sequence numbers make it possible for the directory to contain multiple
certificates with the same subject name hash value.
For example, it is possible to have in the store several certificates
with the same subject or several CRLs with the same issuer (and, for
example, a different validity period).
.Pp
When checking for new CRLs, once one CRL for a given hash value is
loaded, hash_dir lookup method checks only for certificates with
sequence number greater than that of the already cached CRL.
.Pp
Note that the hash algorithm used for subject name hashing changed in
OpenSSL 1.0.0, and all certificate stores have to be rehashed when
moving from OpenSSL 0.9.8 to 1.0.0.
.Ss Memory Method
The
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_mem
method supports loading PEM-encoded certificates and revocation lists
that are already stored in memory, using the function
.Xr X509_LOOKUP_add_mem 3 .
This is particularly useful in processes using
.Xr chroot 2 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions always return a pointer to a static object.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations 3 ,
.Xr X509_LOOKUP_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_load_locations 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_hash_dir
and
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_file
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn X509_LOOKUP_mem
first appeared in
.Ox 5.7 .
