.\" $OpenBSD: X509_add1_trust_object.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:40:30 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt X509_ADD1_TRUST_OBJECT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm X509_add1_trust_object ,
.Nm X509_trust_clear ,
.Nm X509_add1_reject_object ,
.Nm X509_reject_clear
.Nd mark an X.509 certificate as intended for a specific purpose
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libcrypto
.In openssl/x509.h
.Ft int
.Fo X509_add1_trust_object
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fa "const ASN1_OBJECT *purpose"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo X509_trust_clear
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo X509_add1_reject_object
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fa "const ASN1_OBJECT *purpose"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo X509_reject_clear
.Fa "X509 *x"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn X509_add1_trust_object
appends a deep copy of the
.Fa purpose
object to the set of intended purposes that
.Fa x
contains as non-standard auxiliary data.
The function
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3
can be used to create appropriate purpose objects from the
.Dv NID_*
constants mentioned in
.Xr X509_check_purpose 3 ,
even though the
.Dv X509_PURPOSE_*
constants listed in that manual page are not intended for use with
.Fn X509_add1_trust_object .
.Pp
.Fn X509_trust_clear
frees and removes all purpose objects from the set of intended
purposes in the non-standard auxiliary data of
.Fa x .
.Pp
.Fn X509_add1_reject_object
and
.Fn X509_reject_clear
are similar except that they operate on a set of unintended purposes.
.Pp
As an alternative to using the functions documented in the present
manual page, X.509 certificate extensions can be used.
At the price of higher complexity, those allow storing the purpose
inside the certificate itself in a standard-conforming way rather than
merely in non-standard auxiliary data associated with the certificate.
See
.Xr EXTENDED_KEY_USAGE_new 3
for details.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn X509_add1_trust_object
and
.Fn X509_add1_reject_object
return the new number of purposes in the respective set
or 0 if an error occurs, in particular if memory
allocation fails or if
.Fa x
does not contain a sub-object that can hold non-standard auxiliary data.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ASN1_OBJECT_new 3 ,
.Xr EXTENDED_KEY_USAGE_new 3 ,
.Xr OBJ_nid2obj 3 ,
.Xr X509_CERT_AUX_new 3 ,
.Xr X509_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.4 and have been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
