.\"	$OpenBSD: boot_macppc.8,v 1.23 2022/09/05 10:29:27 kn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)boot_macppc.8
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 5 2022 $
.Dt BOOT_MACPPC 8 macppc
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm boot_macppc
.Nd macppc system bootstrapping procedures
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss System startup
When powered on, after a panic, or if the system is rebooted via
.Xr reboot 8
or
.Xr shutdown 8 ,
the Open Firmware will proceed to its initialization,
and will boot an operating system if the
.Va auto-boot?\&
variable is set to
.Dq true ,
or will wait for interactive commands otherwise.
.Ss Boot process description
The Apple Open Firmware will normally load the kernel from the device and
filename as instructed by the
.Va boot-device
and
.Va boot-file
variables.
If the
.Va boot-file
variable is empty, the
.Ox
bootloader will look for a kernel named
.Pa bsd ,
unless a different filename has been specified in the boot command.
To reset this variable to its default, empty, value, type the following
at the Open Firmware prompt:
.Pp
.Dl set-default boot-device
.Pp
The
.Ox
bootstrap program is named
.Dq ofwboot .
It can be installed either in a HFS partition or in a
MSDOS partition on the disk.
If MBR partitioning is chosen for
the disk, the bootstrap program will be installed automatically during the
.Ox
installation procedure.
For HFS shared disks, the
.Pa ofwboot
file must be installed manually.
The ofwboot program can be loaded from any Open Firmware recognized
disk or network device.
.Ss Boot process options
If invoked manually without parameters, or if the specified kernel could
not be loaded, the
.Ox
bootloader will let the user enter a boot device, kernel
filename and boot options.
.Pp
If the special line
.Ic exit
is entered, the bootloader will attempt to restart the machine.
.Pp
The file specification used is of the form:
.Pp
.Dl Oo Oo Ar promdev : Oc Ns Ar filename Oc Op Fl acds
.Pp
where
.Ar promdev
is an optional Open Firmware device name (such as
.Dq hd
or
.Dq ide ) .
Normal line editing characters can be used when typing the file
specification.
.Pp
The following options are recognized:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "-XXX" -offset indent -compact
.It Fl a
Prompt for the root filesystem and swap devices after the devices have
been configured.
.It Fl c
Enter the
.Dq User Kernel Config
mode upon startup
.Pq see Xr boot_config 8 .
.It Fl d
Enter the debugger,
.Xr ddb 4 ,
as soon as the kernel console has been initialized.
.It Fl s
Boot the system single-user.
The system will be booted multi-user unless this option is specified.
.El
.Ss Abnormal system termination
In case of system crashes, the kernel will usually enter the kernel
debugger,
.Xr ddb 4 ,
unless it is not present in the kernel, or it is disabled via the
.Va ddb.panic
sysctl.
Upon leaving ddb, or if ddb was not entered, the kernel will halt the system
if it was still in device configuration phase, or attempt a dump to the
configured dump device, if possible.
The crash dump will then be recovered by
.Xr savecore 8
during the next multi-user boot cycle.
It is also possible to force other behaviours from ddb.
.Ss Accessing the PROM
The prom can only be accessed during system reset, or at power-up.
To enter Open Firmware, press and hold
.Dq Cntrl
.Dq Cmd
.Dq o
.Dq f
as the machine resets until it enters the Open Firmware debugger.
.Pp
On an Xserve using serial console the System Identifier button is used to
enter Open Firmware instead of the keyboard.
To enter Open Firmware, hold down the System Identifier button while pressing
the Power button.
When the upper LED bank begins lighting up in sequence, repeatedly press
the System Identifier button until the seventh LED from the right is
highlighted in the lower bank.
Now hold the System Identifier button for two seconds, until all the top
row LEDs light up.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/mdec/ofwboot -compact
.It Pa /bsd
default system kernel
.It Pa /bsd.rd
standalone installation kernel, suitable for disaster recovery
.It Pa /usr/mdec/ofwboot
system bootstrap (usually installed on a stand-alone FAT partition or an
Apple HFS partition, to be readable by Open Firmware)
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ddb 4 ,
.Xr boot_config 8 ,
.Xr halt 8 ,
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr installboot 8 ,
.Xr reboot 8 ,
.Xr savecore 8 ,
.Xr shutdown 8
