.\"	$OpenBSD: airport.7,v 1.4 2022/02/18 10:24:32 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Sebastian Benoit <benno@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 18 2022 $
.Dt AIRPORT 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm airport
.Nd list of IATA airport codes
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file is a list of airports that have an IATA airport code.
The list is sorted alphabetically by airport code.
.Pp
The list is not a complete list of all IATA codes.
New airports can only be added by
.Ox
developers who have visited an airport and thereby have verified its existence.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/misc/airport -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/airport
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Lk https://www.iata.org/codes "Airline and Airport Code Search"
.Sh CAVEATS
There are also railway stations with IATA codes.
These may not be listed, except if someone landed there by plane and
survived to update the file.
