.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005,2008
.\"	Hartmut Brandt.
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Author: Hartmut Brandt <harti@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 8, 2008
.Dt BSD.SNMPMOD.MK 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bsd.snmpmod.mk
.Nd building modules for
.Xr bsnmpd 1
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd ".include <bsd.snmpmod.mk>"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.In bsd.snmpmod.mk
simplifies the building of modules for the Begemot SNMP daemon,
.Xr bsnmpd 1 .
It provides some common functions for building a module and
relies on
.In bsd.lib.mk ,
which is included by
.In bsd.snmpmod.mk
to actually build the shared library.
.Pp
The following
.Xr make 1
variables control the special functions:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va EXTRAMIBDEFS"
.It Va MOD
The short name of the module.
The name of the shared library will be
.Pa snmp_${MOD}.so .
There must exist a file
.Pa ${MOD}_tree.def
for compilation with
.Xr gensnmptree 1
which contains the definition of the MIB tree implemented by the module.
.It Va EXTRAMIBDEFS
A list of extra MIB definition files for
.Xr gensnmptree 1 .
This is optional.
This file list is given to both calls to
.Xr gensnmptree 1 No \(em
the one that extracts the symbols in
.Va XSYM
from the MIB definitions and the one that
generates the table with OIDs served by this module.
.It Va EXTRAMIBSYMS
A list of extra MIB definition files for
.Xr gensnmptree 1 .
This is optional.
This file list is given only to the call to
.Xr gensnmptree 1
that extracts symbols from MIB definition files.
It is useful if there are dependencies on other MIBs or for extracting global
definitions for enumeration constants.
.It Va XSYM
A list of symbols to be extracted from the MIB definition files by
.Xr gensnmptree 1 .
This is optional.
.It Va DEFS
A list of MIB definition files to be installed.
This is optional.
.It Va BMIBS
A list of textual MIBs to be installed.
This is optional.
.El
.Pp
Three files are automatically created from the MIB definition files and
the
.Va XSYM
variable:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va EXTRAMIBDEFS"
.It Pa ${MOD}_tree.c
This contains a table with the tree implemented by the module.
It is automatically included into the
.Va SRCS
variable.
.It Pa ${MOD}_tree.h
This contains preprocessor defines for all the OIDs defined by the module
and can be included in the module's source code.
.It Pa ${MOD}_oid.h
OID preprocessor definitions for all the symbols listed in
.Va XSYMS .
This is to be included into the module's source code.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bsnmpd 1 ,
.Xr gensnmptree 1 ,
.Xr snmpmod 3
