.\" Copyright (c) 2000
.\"	Mike W. Meyer
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 3, 2018
.Dt BUILD 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm build
.Nd information on how to build the system
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The sources for the
.Fx
system and its applications are contained in three different directories,
normally
.Pa /usr/src ,
.Pa /usr/doc ,
and
.Pa /usr/ports .
These directories may be initially empty or non-existent until updated with
.Xr svn 1
or
.Xr svnlite 1
or
.Xr portsnap 8 .
Directory
.Pa /usr/src
contains the
.Dq "base system"
sources, which is loosely defined as the things required to rebuild
the system to a useful state.
Directory
.Pa /usr/doc
contains the source for the system documentation, excluding the manual
pages.
Directory
.Pa /usr/ports
contains a tree that provides a consistent interface for building and
installing third party applications.
For more information about the ports build process, see
.Xr ports 7 .
.Pp
The
.Xr make 1
command is used in each of these directories to build and install the
things in that directory.
Issuing the
.Xr make 1
command in any directory or
subdirectory of those directories has the same effect as issuing the
same command in all subdirectories of that directory.
With no target specified, the things in that directory are just built.
.Pp
A source tree is allowed to be read-only.
As described in
.Xr make 1 ,
objects are usually built in a separate object directory hierarchy
specified by the environment variable
.Va MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX ,
or under
.Pa /usr/obj
if variable
.Va MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX
is not set.
The canonical object directory is described in the documentation for the
.Cm buildworld
target below.
.Pp
The build may be controlled by defining
.Xr make 1
variables described in the
.Sx ENVIRONMENT
section below, and by the variables documented in
.Xr make.conf 5 .
.Pp
The following list provides the names and actions for the targets
supported by the build system:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm cleandepend"
.It Cm analyze
Run Clang static analyzer against all objects and present output on stdout.
.It Cm check
Run tests for a given subdirectory.
The default directory used is
.Pa ${.OBJDIR} ,
but the check directory can be changed with
.Pa ${CHECKDIR} .
.It Cm checkworld
Run the
.Fx
test suite on installed world.
.It Cm clean
Remove any files created during the build process.
.It Cm cleandepend
Remove the
.Pa ${.OBJDIR}/${DEPENDFILE}*
files generated by prior
.Dq Li "make"
and
.Dq Li "make depend"
steps.
.It Cm cleandir
Remove the canonical object directory if it exists, or perform
actions equivalent to
.Dq Li "make clean cleandepend"
if it does not.
This target will also remove an
.Pa obj
link in
.Pa ${.CURDIR}
if that exists.
.Pp
It is advisable to run
.Dq Li "make cleandir"
twice: the first invocation will remove the canonical object directory
and the second one will clean up
.Pa ${.CURDIR} .
.It Cm depend
Generate a list of build dependencies in file
.Pa ${.OBJDIR}/${DEPENDFILE} .
Per-object dependencies are generated at build time and stored in
.Pa ${.OBJDIR}/${DEPENDFILE}.${OBJ} .
.It Cm install
Install the results of the build to the appropriate location in the
installation directory hierarchy specified in variable
.Va DESTDIR .
.It Cm obj
Create the canonical object directory associated with the current
directory.
.It Cm objlink
Create a symbolic link to the canonical object directory in
.Pa ${.CURDIR} .
.It Cm tags
Generate a tags file using the program specified in the
.Xr make 1
variable
.Va CTAGS .
The build system supports
.Xr ctags 1
and
.Nm "GNU Global" .
.El
.Pp
The other supported targets under directory
.Pa /usr/src
are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm distributeworld"
.It Cm buildenv
Spawn an interactive shell with environment variables set up for
building the system or individual components.
For cross-building the target architecture needs to be specified with
.Xr make 1
variables
.Va TARGET_ARCH
and
.Va TARGET .
.Pp
This target is only useful after a complete toolchain (including
the compiler, linker, assembler, headers and libraries) has been
built; see the
.Cm toolchain
target below.
.It Cm buildworld
Build everything but the kernel, configure files in
.Pa etc ,
and
.Pa release .
The object directory can be changed from the default
.Pa /usr/obj
by setting the
.Pa MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX
.Xr make 1
variable.
The actual build location prefix used
depends on the
.Va WITH_UNIFIED_OBJDIR
option from
.Xr src.conf 5 .
If enabled it is
.Pa ${MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX}${.CURDIR}/${TARGET}.${TARGET_ARCH}
for all builds.
If disabled it is
.Pa ${MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX}${.CURDIR}
for native builds, and
.Pa ${MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX}/${TARGET}.${TARGET_ARCH}${.CURDIR}
for cross builds and native builds with variable
.Va CROSS_BUILD_TESTING
set.
.It Cm cleanworld
Attempt to clean up targets built by a preceding
.Cm buildworld ,
or similar step built from this source directory.
.It Cm cleanuniverse
When
.Va WITH_UNIFIED_OBJDIR
is enabled, attempt to clean up targets built by a preceding
.Cm buildworld ,
.Cm universe ,
or similar step, for any architecture built from this source directory.
.It Cm distributeworld
Distribute everything compiled by a preceding
.Cm buildworld
step.
Files are placed in the directory hierarchy specified by
.Xr make 1
variable
.Va DISTDIR .
This target is used while building a release; see
.Xr release 7 .
.It Cm native-xtools
This target builds a cross-toolchain for the given
.Sy TARGET
and
.Sy TARGET_ARCH ,
as well as a select list of static userland tools for the host system.
This is intended to be used in a jail where QEMU is used to improve
performance by avoiding emulating binaries that do not need to be emulated.
.Sy TARGET
and
.Sy TARGET_ARCH
should be defined.
.It Cm native-xtools-install
Installs the results to
.Pa ${DESTDIR}/${NXTP}
where
.Va NXTP
defaults to
.Pa nxb-bin .
.Sy TARGET
and
.Sy TARGET_ARCH
must be defined.
.It Cm packageworld
Archive the results of
.Cm distributeworld ,
placing the results in
.Va DISTDIR .
This target is used while building a release; see
.Xr release 7 .
.It Cm installworld
Install everything built by a preceding
.Cm buildworld
step into the directory hierarchy pointed to by
.Xr make 1
variable
.Va DESTDIR .
.Pp
If installing onto an NFS file system and running
.Xr make 1
with the
.Fl j
option, make sure that
.Xr rpc.lockd 8
is running on both client and server.
See
.Xr rc.conf 5
on how to make it start at boot time.
.It Cm toolchain
Create the build toolchain needed to build the rest of the system.
For cross-architecture builds, this step creates a cross-toolchain.
.It Cm universe
For each architecture,
execute a
.Cm buildworld
followed by a
.Cm buildkernel
for all kernels for that architecture,
including
.Pa LINT .
This command takes a long time.
.It Cm update
Get updated sources as configured in
.Xr make.conf 5 .
.It Cm targets
Print a list of supported
.Va TARGET
/
.Va TARGET_ARCH
pairs for world and kernel targets.
.It Cm tinderbox
Execute the same targets as
.Cm universe .
In addition print a summary of all failed targets at the end and
exit with an error if there were any.
.It Cm toolchains
Create a build toolchain for each architecture supported by the build system.
.It Cm xdev
Builds and installs a cross-toolchain and sysroot for the given
.Sy TARGET
and
.Sy TARGET_ARCH .
The sysroot contains target library and headers.
The target is an alias for
.Cm xdev-build
and
.Cm xdev-install .
The location of the files installed can be controlled with
.Va DESTDIR .
The target location in
.Va DESTDIR
is
.Pa ${DESTDIR}/${XDTP}
where
.Va XDTP
defaults to
.Pa /usr/${XDDIR}
and
.Va XDDIR
defaults to
.Pa ${TARGET_ARCH}-freebsd .
.It Cm xdev-build
Builds for the
.Cm xdev
target.
.It Cm xdev-install
Installs the files for the
.Cm xdev
target.
.It Cm xdev-links
Installs autoconf-style symlinks to
.Pa ${DESTDIR}/usr/bin
pointing into the xdev toolchain in
.Pa ${DESTDIR}/${XDTP} .
.El
.Pp
Kernel specific build targets in
.Pa /usr/src
are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm distributekernel"
.It Cm buildkernel
Rebuild the kernel and the kernel modules.
The object directory can be changed from the default
.Pa /usr/obj
by setting the
.Pa MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX
.Xr make 1
variable.
.It Cm installkernel
Install the kernel and the kernel modules to directory
.Pa ${DESTDIR}/boot/kernel ,
renaming any pre-existing directory with this name to
.Pa kernel.old
if it contained the currently running kernel.
The target directory under
.Pa ${DESTDIR}
may be modified using the
.Va INSTKERNNAME
and
.Va KODIR
.Xr make 1
variables.
.It Cm distributekernel
Install the kernel to the directory
.Pa ${DISTDIR}/kernel/boot/kernel .
This target is used while building a release; see
.Xr release 7 .
.It Cm packagekernel
Archive the results of
.Cm distributekernel ,
placing the results in
.Va DISTDIR .
This target is used while building a release; see
.Xr release 7 .
.It Cm kernel
Equivalent to
.Cm buildkernel
followed by
.Cm installkernel
.It Cm kernel-toolchain
Rebuild the tools needed for kernel compilation.
Use this if you did not do a
.Cm buildworld
first.
.It Cm reinstallkernel
Reinstall the kernel and the kernel modules, overwriting the contents
of the target directory.
As with the
.Cm installkernel
target, the target directory can be specified using the
.Xr make 1
variable
.Va INSTKERNNAME .
.El
.Pp
Convenience targets for cleaning up the install destination directory
denoted by variable
.Va DESTDIR
include:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm delete-old-libs"
.It Cm check-old
Print a list of old files and directories in the system.
.It Cm delete-old
Delete obsolete base system files and directories interactively.
When
.Li -DBATCH_DELETE_OLD_FILES
is specified at the command line, the delete operation will be
non-interactive.
The variables
.Va DESTDIR ,
.Va TARGET_ARCH
and
.Va TARGET
should be set as with
.Dq Li "make installworld" .
.It Cm delete-old-libs
Delete obsolete base system libraries interactively.
This target should only be used if no third party software uses these
libraries.
When
.Li -DBATCH_DELETE_OLD_FILES
is specified at the command line, the delete operation will be
non-interactive.
The variables
.Va DESTDIR ,
.Va TARGET_ARCH
and
.Va TARGET
should be set as with
.Dq Li "make installworld" .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Variables that influence all builds include:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX"
.It Va DEBUG_FLAGS
Defines a set of debugging flags that will be used to build all userland
binaries under
.Pa /usr/src .
When
.Va DEBUG_FLAGS
is defined, the
.Cm install
and
.Cm installworld
targets install binaries from the current
.Va MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX
without stripping,
so that debugging information is retained in the installed binaries.
.It Va DESTDIR
The directory hierarchy prefix where built objects will be installed.
If not set,
.Va DESTDIR
defaults to the empty string.
.It Va MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX
Defines the prefix for directory names in the tree of built objects.
Defaults to
.Pa /usr/obj
if not defined.
This variable should only be set in the environment or
.Pa /etc/src-env.conf
and not via
.Pa /etc/make.conf
or
.Pa /etc/src.conf
or the command line.
.It Va NO_WERROR
If defined, compiler warnings will not cause the build to halt,
even if the makefile says otherwise.
.It Va WITH_CTF
If defined, the build process will run the DTrace CTF conversion
tools on built objects.
.El
.Pp
Additionally, builds in
.Pa /usr/src
are influenced by the following
.Xr make 1
variables:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va SUBDIR_OVERRIDE"
.It Va KERNCONF
Overrides which kernel to build and install for the various kernel
make targets.
It defaults to
.Cm GENERIC .
.It Va KERNCONFDIR
Overrides the directory in which
.Va KERNCONF
and any files included by
.Va KERNCONF
should be found.
Defaults to
.Pa sys/${ARCH}/conf .
.It Va KERNFAST
If set, the build target
.Cm buildkernel
defaults to setting
.Va NO_KERNELCLEAN ,
.Va NO_KERNELCONFIG ,
and
.Va NO_KERNELOBJ .
When set to a value other than
.Cm 1
then
.Va KERNCONF
is set to the value of
.Va KERNFAST .
.It Va LOCAL_DIRS
If set, this variable supplies a list of additional directories relative to
the root of the source tree to build as part of the
.Cm everything
target.
The directories are built in parallel with each other,
and with the base system directories.
Insert a
.Va .WAIT
directive at the beginning of the
.Va LOCAL_DIRS
list to ensure all base system directories are built first.
.Va .WAIT
may also be used as needed elsewhere within the list.
.It Va LOCAL_ITOOLS
If set, this variable supplies a list of additional tools that are used by the
.Cm installworld
and
.Cm distributeworld
targets.
.It Va LOCAL_LIB_DIRS
If set, this variable supplies a list of additional directories relative to
the root of the source tree to build as part of the
.Cm libraries
target.
The directories are built in parallel with each other,
and with the base system libraries.
Insert a
.Va .WAIT
directive at the beginning of the
.Va LOCAL_DIRS
list to ensure all base system libraries are built first.
.Va .WAIT
may also be used as needed elsewhere within the list.
.It Va LOCAL_MTREE
If set, this variable supplies a list of additional mtrees relative to the
root of the source tree to use as part of the
.Cm hierarchy
target.
.It Va LOCAL_TOOL_DIRS
If set, this variable supplies a list of additional directories relative to
the root of the source tree to build as part of the
.Cm build-tools
target.
.It Va LOCAL_XTOOL_DIRS
If set, this variable supplies a list of additional directories relative to
the root of the source tree to build as part of the
.Cm cross-tools
target.
.It Va PORTS_MODULES
A list of ports with kernel modules that should be built and installed
as part of the
.Cm buildkernel
and
.Cm installkernel
process.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
make PORTS_MODULES=emulators/kqemu-kmod kernel
.Ed
.It Va STRIPBIN
Command to use at install time when stripping binaries.
Be sure to add any additional tools required to run
.Va STRIPBIN
to the
.Va LOCAL_ITOOLS
.Xr make 1
variable before running the
.Cm distributeworld
or
.Cm installworld
targets.
See
.Xr install 1
for more details.
.It Va SUBDIR_OVERRIDE
Override the default list of sub-directories and only build the
sub-directory named in this variable.
If combined with
.Cm buildworld
then all libraries and includes, and some of the build tools will still build
as well.
Specifying
.Cm -DNO_LIBS ,
and
.Cm -DWORLDFAST
will only build the specified directory as was done historically.
When combined with
.Cm buildworld
it is necesarry to override
.Va LOCAL_LIB_DIRS
with any custom directories containing libraries.
This allows building a subset of the system in the same way as
.Cm buildworld
does using its sysroot handling.
This variable can also be useful when debugging failed builds.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
make some-target SUBDIR_OVERRIDE=foo/bar
.Ed
.It Va TARGET
The target hardware platform.
This is analogous to the
.Dq Nm uname Fl m
output.
This is necessary to cross-build some target architectures.
For example, cross-building for ARM64 machines requires
.Va TARGET_ARCH Ns = Ns Li aarch64
and
.Va TARGET Ns = Ns Li arm64 .
If not set,
.Va TARGET
defaults to the current hardware platform, unless
.Va TARGET_ARCH
is also set, in which case it defaults to the appropriate
value for that architecture.
.It Va TARGET_ARCH
The target machine processor architecture.
This is analogous to the
.Dq Nm uname Fl p
output.
Set this to cross-build for a different architecture.
If not set,
.Va TARGET_ARCH
defaults to the current machine architecture, unless
.Va TARGET
is also set, in which case it defaults to the appropriate
value for that platform.
Typically, one only needs to set
.Va TARGET .
.El
.Pp
Builds under directory
.Pa /usr/src
are also influenced by defining one or more of the following symbols,
using the
.Fl D
option of
.Xr make 1 :
.Bl -tag -width ".Va -DNO_KERNELCONFIG"
.It Va LOADER_DEFAULT_INTERP
Defines what interpreter the default loader program will have.
Valid values include
.Dq 4th ,
.Dq lua ,
and
.Dq simp .
This creates the default link for
.Pa /boot/loader
to the loader with that interpreter.
It also determines what interpreter is compiled into
.Pa userboot .
.It Va NO_CLEANDIR
If set, the build targets that clean parts of the object tree use the
equivalent of
.Dq make clean
instead of
.Dq make cleandir .
.It Va NO_CLEAN
If set, no object tree files are cleaned at all.
This is the default when
.Va WITH_META_MODE
is used with
.Xr filemon 4
loaded.
See
.Xr src.conf 5
for more details.
Setting
.Va NO_CLEAN
implies
.Va NO_KERNELCLEAN ,
so when
.Va NO_CLEAN
is set no kernel objects are cleaned either.
.It Va NO_CTF
If set, the build process does not run the DTrace CTF conversion tools
on built objects.
.It Va NO_SHARE
If set, the build does not descend into the
.Pa /usr/src/share
subdirectory (i.e., manual pages, locale data files, timezone data files and
other
.Pa /usr/src/share
files will not be rebuild from their sources).
.It Va NO_KERNELCLEAN
If set, the build process does not run
.Dq make clean
as part of the
.Cm buildkernel
target.
.It Va NO_KERNELCONFIG
If set, the build process does not run
.Xr config 8
as part of the
.Cm buildkernel
target.
.It Va NO_KERNELOBJ
If set, the build process does not run
.Dq make obj
as part of the
.Cm buildkernel
target.
.It Va NO_DOCUPDATE
If set, the update process does not update the source of the
.Fx
documentation as part of the
.Dq make update
target.
.It Va NO_LIBS
If set, the libraries phase will be skipped.
.It Va NO_OBJWALK
If set, no object directories will be created.
This should only be used if object directories were created in a
previous build and no new directories are connected.
.It Va NO_PORTSUPDATE
If set, the update process does not update the Ports tree as part of the
.Dq make update
target.
.It Va NO_WWWUPDATE
If set, the update process does not update the www tree as part of the
.Dq make update
target.
.It Va WORLDFAST
If set, the build target
.Cm buildworld
defaults to setting
.Va NO_CLEAN ,
.Va NO_OBJWALK ,
and will skip most bootstrap phases.
It will only bootstrap libraries and build all of userland.
This option should be used only when it is known that none of the bootstrap
needs changed and that no new directories have been connected to the build.
.El
.Pp
Builds under directory
.Pa /usr/doc
are influenced by the following
.Xr make 1
variables:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va DOC_LANG"
.It Va DOC_LANG
If set, restricts the documentation build to the language subdirectories
specified as its content.
The default action is to build documentation for all languages.
.El
.Pp
Builds using the
.Cm universe
target are influenced by the following
.Xr make 1
variables:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va MAKE_JUST_KERNELS"
.It Va JFLAG
Pass the value of this variable to each
.Xr make 1
invocation used to build worlds and kernels.
This can be used to enable multiple jobs within a single architecture's build
while still building each architecture serially.
.It Va MAKE_JUST_KERNELS
Only build kernels for each supported architecture.
.It Va MAKE_JUST_WORLDS
Only build worlds for each supported architecture.
.It Va UNIVERSE_TARGET
Execute the specified
.Xr make 1
target for each supported architecture instead of the default action of
building a world and one or more kernels.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /usr/share/examples/etc/make.conf" -compact
.It Pa /usr/doc/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/doc/share/mk/doc.project.mk
.It Pa /usr/ports/Mk/bsd.port.mk
.It Pa /usr/ports/Mk/bsd.sites.mk
.It Pa /usr/share/examples/etc/make.conf
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile.inc1
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
For an
.Dq approved
method of updating your system from the latest sources, please see the
.Sx COMMON ITEMS
section in
.Pa src/UPDATING .
.Pp
The following sequence of commands can be used to cross-build the
system for the armv6 architecture on an amd64 host:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd /usr/src
make TARGET_ARCH=armv6 buildworld buildkernel
make TARGET_ARCH=armv6 DESTDIR=/clients/arm installworld installkernel
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cc 1 ,
.Xr install 1 ,
.Xr make 1 ,
.Xr svn 1 ,
.Xr svnlite 1 ,
.Xr make.conf 5 ,
.Xr src.conf 5 ,
.Xr arch 7 ,
.Xr ports 7 ,
.Xr release 7 ,
.Xr tests 7 ,
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr mergemaster 8 ,
.Xr portsnap 8 ,
.Xr reboot 8 ,
.Xr shutdown 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Mike W. Meyer Aq Mt mwm@mired.org
