.\"	$OpenBSD: hier.7,v 1.170 2022/10/23 08:00:29 jmc Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: hier.7,v 1.7 1994/11/30 19:07:10 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)hier.7	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: October 23 2022 $
.Dt HIER 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hier
.Nd layout of filesystems
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A sketch of the filesystem hierarchy.
.Bl -tag -width "/altroot/"
.It /
Root directory.
.It /altroot/
Alternate (backup) location for the root
.Pq Sq /
filesystem
(see
.Xr daily 8 ) .
.It /bin/
User utilities fundamental to both single and multi-user environments.
These programs are statically compiled and therefore do not depend on any
system libraries to run.
.It /bsd
Pure kernel executable
(the operating system loaded into memory at boot-time).
.It /bsd.mp
Pure kernel executable
for multiprocessor machines.
.It /bsd.rd
Installation kernel.
The built-in RAM disk contains utilities which can be run
without an external file system, so this kernel is useful
for limited system maintenance too.
.It /bsd.sp
Pure kernel executable
for single processor machines.
.It /dev/
Block and character device files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width MAKEDEV -compact
.It MAKEDEV
Script for creating device files (see
.Xr MAKEDEV 8 ) .
.It fd/
File descriptor files (see
.Xr fd 4 ) .
.El
.It /etc/
System configuration files and scripts.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "raddb/servers/" -compact
.It localtime
Local time zone information (see
.Xr ctime 3 ) .
.It X11/
Configuration files for the X11 window system.
.It acme/
Private keys for
.Xr acme-client 1 .
.It amd/
Contains map files for
.Xr amd 8 .
.It authpf/
Configuration files for the authenticating gateway user shell (see
.Xr authpf 8 ) .
.It examples/
Example configuration files for base system daemons.
.It firmware/
Firmware files for various devices.
.It fonts/
Configuration files for X11 window system fonts.
.It hotplug/
Scripts for the hotplug daemon,
.Xr hotplugd 8 .
.It iked/
Configuration files for
.Xr iked 8 .
.It isakmpd/
Configuration files for
.Xr isakmpd 8 .
.It ldap/
Certificates and schema definition files for
.Xr ldapd 8 .
.It login.conf.d/
Additional login attributes for
.Xr login.conf 5 .
.It mail/
System mail configuration files.
.It mtree/
.Xr mtree 8
configuration files.
.It npppd/
.Xr npppd 8
configuration files.
.It ppp/
.Xr pppd 8
configuration files.
.It raddb/servers/
List of radius servers and their associated shared secrets for
.Xr login_radius 8 .
.It rc.d/
.Xr packages 7
start/stop scripts and subroutines for
.Xr rc 8 .
.It rpki/
TAL and configuration files for
.Xr rpki-client 8 .
.It signify/
Key files used by
.Xr signify 1 .
.It skel/
Example
.Sq .\&
(dot) files for new accounts.
.It skey/
One-time password user database for
.Xr skey 1 .
.It ssh/
Configuration files for
.Xr ssh 1
and
.Xr sshd 8 .
.It ssl/
OpenSSL configuration files (see
.Xr openssl 1 ) .
.El
.It /home/
Default location for user home directories.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width _sysupgrade/ -compact
.It _sysupgrade/
Download location for
.Xr sysupgrade 8 .
.El
.It /mnt/
Empty directory commonly used by
system administrators as a temporary mount point.
.It /root/
Default home directory for the superuser.
.It /sbin/
System programs and administration utilities
fundamental to both single and multi-user environments.
Most of these programs are statically compiled and therefore do not
depend on any system libraries to run.
.It /tmp/
Temporary files that are
.Em not
preserved between system reboots.
Periodically cleaned by
.Xr daily 8 .
.It /usr/
Contains the majority of user utilities and applications.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "xenocara/" -compact
.It X11R6/
Files required for the X11 window system.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "include/" -compact
.It bin/
X11 binaries.
.It include/
X11-specific C include files.
.It lib/
X11 archive libraries.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "pkgconfig/" -compact
.It X11/
Default configuration files for X11 and companion applications.
.It modules/
Various libraries and drivers for the X11 window system.
.It pkgconfig/
Package metadata for
.Xr pkg-config 1 .
.It xorg/
Data files used by the X server.
.El
.Pp
.It man/
X11 manual pages.
.It share/
Architecture independent data files.
.El
.Pp
.It bin/
Common utilities, programming tools, and applications.
.It games/
Useful and semi-frivolous programs.
.It include/
Standard C include files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "libmilter/" -compact
.It arpa/
C include files for Internet service protocols.
.It c++/
Include files for the Clang C++ compiler.
.It cbor/
C include files for the Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR)
library.
.It crypto/
C include files for the cryptographic libraries.
.It ddb/
C include files for the kernel debugger (see
.Xr ddb 4 ) .
.It dev/
Device-specific C include files.
.It fido/
C include files for the U2F/FIDO2 communication library.
.It g++/
Include files for the GNU C++ compiler.
.It isofs/
C include files for the ISO standard file systems (currently only cd9660).
.It llvm/
C++ include files for LLVM.
.It llvm-c/
C include files for LLVM.
.It machine/
Machine specific C include files.
.It miscfs/
C include files for miscellaneous file systems.
.It msdosfs/
C include files for MS-DOS file system.
.It net/
Miscellaneous network C include files.
.It net80211/
C include files for 802.11 wireless networking.
.It netinet/
C include files for Internet standard protocols (see
.Xr inet 4 ) .
.It netinet6/
C include files for Internet protocol version 6 (see
.Xr inet6 4 ) .
.It netmpls/
C include files for the MPLS protocol.
.It nfs/
C include files for NFS (Network File System).
.It ntfs/
C include files for NTFS file system.
.It openssl/
C include files for the OpenSSL library (see
.Xr ssl 8 ) .
.It protocols/
C include files for Berkeley service protocols.
.It readline/
C include files for the
.Xr readline 3
library.
.It rpc/
C include files for remote procedure calling (see
.Xr rpc 5 ) .
.It rpcsvc/
C include files for rpcsvc.
.It scsi/
SCSI-specific C include files.
.It sys/
System C include files (kernel data structures).
.It ufs/
C include files for UFS (the U-word File System).
.It uvm/
C include files for the virtual memory interface.
.El
.Pp
.It lib/
System libraries.
See
.Xr intro 3
for a description of library types.
.It libdata/
Miscellaneous utility data files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "ldscripts/" -compact
.It cvs/
Placeholder for user contributed
.Xr cvs 1
code/scripts.
.It ldscripts/
ELF linker scripts.
.It perl5/
Data files for
.Xr perl 1 .
.El
.Pp
.It libexec/
System daemons and utilities (executed by other programs).
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "cvs/contrib/" -compact
.It auth/
Login scripts used to authenticate users (for
.Bx
Authentication).
.It cvs/contrib/
User contributed
.Xr cvs 1
scripts.
.It lpr/
Contains the lpf filter for
.Xr lpd 8 .
.It radiusd/
Authentication modules for
.Xr radiusd 8 .
.It snmpd/
SNMP subagents.
.El
.Pp
.It local/
Local executables, libraries, etc.
.It mdec/
Boot-related executables.
.It obj/
Architecture specific target tree produced by building the
.Pa /usr/src
tree.
.It ports/
The
.Ox
ports collection (see
.Xr ports 7 ) .
.It sbin/
System daemons and utilities (executed by users).
.It share/
Architecture independent data files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "calendar/" -compact
.It calendar/
Variety of pre-fab calendar files (see
.Xr calendar 1 ) .
.It dict/
Word lists (see
.Xr look 1
and
.Xr spell 1 ) .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width propernames -compact
.It american
Spellings preferred in American usage.
.It british
Spellings preferred in British usage.
.It propernames
List of proper names.
.It stop
Forms that would otherwise be derivable by
.Xr spell 1
from words in the other files in
.Pa /usr/share/dict ,
but should not be accepted.
.It web2
Words from Webster's 2nd International.
.It web2a
Additional words from Webster's.
.It words
Common words.
.It papers/
Reference databases.
.It special/
Custom word lists.
.El
.Pp
.It doc/
Miscellaneous documentation.
.It games/
ASCII text files used by various games.
.It info/
Texinfo source files.
.It locale/
Locales for multi-language support.
.It man/
Manual pages.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width man3p/ -compact
.It man1/
General commands (tools and utilities).
.It man2/
System calls and error numbers.
.It man3/
Libraries.
.It man3p/
.Xr perl 1
programmers' reference guide.
.It man4/
Special files and hardware support.
.It man5/
File formats.
.It man6/
Games.
.It man7/
Miscellaneous.
.It man8/
System maintenance and operation commands.
.It man9/
Kernel internals.
.El
.Pp
.It misc/
Miscellaneous system-wide ASCII text files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width pcvtfonts/ -compact
.It termcap
Terminal characteristics database (see
.Xr termcap 5 ) .
.It pcvtfonts/
Additional console fonts.
.El
.Pp
.It mk/
Templates for
.Xr make 1 .
.It relink/
Link kit for boot-time kernel and library relinking.
.It snmp/
Data files for
.Xr snmpd 8 .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width mibs/ -compact
.It mibs/
Management Information Base (MIB) definitions.
.El
.Pp
.It tabset/
Tab description files for a variety of terminals; used in
the termcap file (see
.Xr termcap 5 ) .
.It terminfo/
Compiled terminal characteristic files (see
.Xr terminfo 5 ) .
.It texinfo/
Templates for
.Xr texinfo 5 .
.It zoneinfo/
Time zone configuration information (see
.Xr tzfile 5 ) .
.El
.Pp
.It src/
.Bx
and/or local source files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "usr.sbin/" -compact
.It bin/
Source for files in
.Pa /bin .
.It distrib/
Source for making distribution sets.
.It etc/
Source for files in
.Pa /etc .
.It games/
Source for files in
.Pa /usr/games .
.It gnu/
Source for files under GPL or other restrictive licenses.
.It include/
Source for files in
.Pa /usr/include .
.It lib/
Source for files in
.Pa /usr/lib .
.It libexec/
Source for files in
.Pa /usr/libexec .
.It regress/
Regress framework.
.It sbin/
Source for files in
.Pa /sbin .
.It share/
Source for files in
.Pa /usr/share .
.It sys/
Kernel source files.
.It usr.bin/
Source for files in
.Pa /usr/bin .
.It usr.sbin/
Source for files in
.Pa /usr/sbin .
.El
.Pp
.It xenocara/
Source for the X11 window system.
.Pp
.It xobj/
Architecture specific target tree produced by building the
.Pa /usr/xenocara
tree.
.El
.It /var/
Multi-purpose log, temporary, transient, and spool files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "sysmerge/" -compact
.It account/
System accounting files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width acct -compact
.It acct
Execution accounting file (see
.Xr acct 5 ) .
.El
.Pp
.It agentx/
Master socket for AgentX-based backends,
managed by
.Xr snmpd 8 .
.It audit/
Audit logs.
.It authpf/
PID file for
.Xr authpf 8 .
.It backups/
Miscellaneous backup files.
.It cache/
Data cached for programs.
.It crash/
Crash dumps written by
.Xr savecore 8 .
.It cron/
Spools and configuration files for
.Xr cron 8
and
.Xr at 1 .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width atjobs/ -compact
.It atjobs/
.Xr at 1
jobs.
.It tabs/
Individual
.Xr crontab 1
files.
.El
.Pp
.It db/
Miscellaneous, automatically generated system-specific database files.
.It empty/
Generic
.Xr chroot 2
directory.
.It games/
Miscellaneous game status and log files.
.It log/
Miscellaneous system log files.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width rdist/ -compact
.It wtmp
Login/logout log (see
.Xr wtmp 5 ) .
.It rdist/
Log files for
.Xr rdist 1 .
.El
.Pp
.It mail/
User mailbox files.
.It nsd/
Database and zone files for
.Xr nsd 8 .
.It quotas/
Filesystem quota information files.
.It run/
System information files describing various info about the
system since it was booted.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width rc.d/ -compact
.It rc.d/
Details of currently running daemons;
used by
.Xr rc.d 8 .
.It utmp
Database of current users (see
.Xr utmp 5 ) .
.El
.Pp
.It spool/
Miscellaneous printer and mail system spooling directories.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "output/" -compact
.It ftp/
Commonly ~ftp; the anonymous ftp root directory.
.It lock/
Lock files for utilities such as
.Xr pppd 8 .
.It output/
Line printer spooling directories.
.It smtpd/
Mail spool for
.Xr smtpd 8 .
.El
.Pp
.It sysmerge/
Checksum files and reference sets
for
.Xr sysmerge 8 .
.It syspatch/
Rollback tarballs and patch files for
.Xr syspatch 8 .
.It tmp -> ../tmp
A symbolic link to the system
.Pa /tmp
directory.
To protect other users of
.Pa /var
from overfill conditions, this is no longer a space you can trust to
retain storage over a reboot.
Periodically cleaned by
.Xr daily 8 .
.It unbound/
Configuration files for
.Xr unbound 8 .
.It www/
Configuration files for
.Xr httpd 8 .
.It yp/
Files for the
.Xr yp 8
subsystem.
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr locate 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1 ,
.Xr whereis 1 ,
.Xr which 1
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
manual page appeared in
.At v7 .
