.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by Chris Costello
.\" at Safeport Network Services and Network Associates Labs, the Security
.\" Research Division of Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR
.\" contract N66001-01-C-8035 ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research
.\" program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The names of the authors may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 25, 2002
.Dt MACLABEL 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm maclabel
.Nd Mandatory Access Control label format
.Sh DESCRIPTION
If Mandatory Access Control, or MAC, is enabled in the kernel,
then in addition to the traditional credentials,
each subject
(typically a user or a socket)
and object
(file system object, socket, etc.\&)
is given a
.Em "MAC label" .
The MAC label specifies the necessary subject-specific or
object-specific information necessary for a MAC security policy
.\" .Pq Xr mac 9
to enforce access control on the subject/object.
.Pp
The format for a MAC label is defined as follows:
.Pp
.Sm off
.D1 Ar policy1 No / Ar qualifier1 , policy2 No / Ar qualifier2 , No ...
.Sm on
.Pp
A MAC label consists of a policy name,
followed by a forward slash,
followed by the subject or object's qualifier,
optionally followed by a comma and one or more additional policy labels.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
biba/low(low-low)
biba/high(low-high),mls/equal(equal-equal),partition/0
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 3 ,
.Xr posix1e 3 ,
.Xr mac_biba 4 ,
.Xr mac_bsdextended 4 ,
.Xr mac_ifoff 4 ,
.Xr mac_mls 4 ,
.Xr mac_none 4 ,
.Xr mac_partition 4 ,
.Xr mac_seeotheruids 4 ,
.Xr mac_test 4 ,
.Xr login.conf 5 ,
.Xr getfmac 8 ,
.Xr getpmac 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr setfmac 8 ,
.Xr setpmac 8 ,
.Xr mac 9
.Sh HISTORY
MAC first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This software was contributed to the
.Fx
Project by NAI Labs, the Security Research Division of Network Associates
Inc.\& under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
