.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"	$NetBSD: tests.kyua.7,v 1.2 2013/07/20 21:39:59 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
.\" GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
.\" OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN
.\" IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 21, 2017
.Dt TESTS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tests
.Nd introduction to the
.Fx
Test Suite
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fx
Test Suite provides a collection of automated tests for two major purposes.
On one hand, the test suite aids
.Em developers
to detect bugs and regressions when they modify the source tree.
On the other hand, it allows
.Em end users
(and, in particular, system administrators) to verify that fresh installations
of the
.Fx
operating system behave correctly on their hardware platform and also to ensure
that the system does not suffer from regressions during regular operation and
maintenance.
.Pp
The
.Fx
Test Suite can be found in the
.Pa /usr/tests
hierarchy.
.Pp
This manual page describes how to run the test suite and how to configure
some of its optional features.
.Ss Installing the test suite
The test suite is installed by default as of
.Fx
11.0-RELEASE.
.Pp
If the
.Pa /usr/tests
directory is missing, then you will have to enable the build of the test
suite, rebuild your system and install the results.
You can do so by setting
.Sq WITH_TESTS=yes
in your
.Pa /etc/src.conf
file (see
.Xr src.conf 5
for details)
and rebuilding the system as described in
.Xr build 7 .
.Ss When to run the tests?
Before diving into the details of how to run the test suite, here are some
scenarios in which you should run it:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
After a fresh installation of
.Fx
to ensure that the system works correctly on your hardware platform.
.It
After an upgrade of
.Fx
to a different version to ensure that the new code works well on your
hardware platform and that the upgrade did not introduce regressions in your
configuration.
.It
After modifying the source tree to detect any new bugs and/or regressions.
.It
Periodically, maybe from a
.Xr cron 8
job, to ensure that any changes to the system (such as the installation of
third-party packages or manual modifications to configuration files) do not
introduce unexpected failures.
.El
.Ss Running the tests
First, you will need to install the
.Sq devel/kyua
package from
.Xr ports 7 .
Then use the following command to run the whole test suite:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua test -k /usr/tests/Kyuafile
.Ed
.Pp
The above will iterate through all test programs in
.Pa /usr/tests
recursively, execute them, store their results and debugging data in Kyua's
database (by default in
.Pa ~/.kyua/store.db ) ,
and print a summary of the results.
This summary includes a brief count of all total tests run and how many of
them failed.
.Pp
It is possible to restrict which tests to run by providing their names in
the command line.
For example, this would execute the tests for the
.Xr cp 1
and
.Xr cut 1
utilities:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua test -k /usr/tests/Kyuafile bin/cp usr.bin/cut
.Ed
.Ss Obtaining reports of the tests execution
Additional information about the test results can be retrieved
by using Kyua's various reporting commands.
For example, the following would print a plain-text report of the executed
tests and show which ones failed:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua report
.Ed
.Pp
This example would generate an HTML report ready to be published on a
web server:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua report-html --output ~/public_html/tests
.Ed
.Pp
For further details on the command-line interface of Kyua, please refer
to its manual page
.Xr kyua 1 .
.Ss Configuring the tests
Some test cases in the
.Fx
Test Suite require manual configuration by the administrator before they can be
run.
Unless certain properties are defined, the tests that require them will be
skipped.
.Pp
Test suites are configured by defining their configuration
variables in
.Pa /usr/local/etc/kyua/kyua.conf .
The format of this file is detailed in
.Xr kyua.conf 5 .
.Pp
The following configuration variables are available in the
.Fx
Test Suite:
.Bl -tag -width "allow_sysctl_side_effects"
.It allow_devfs_side_effects
If defined, enables tests that may destroy and recreate semipermanent device
nodes, like disk devices.
Without this variable, tests may still create and destroy devices nodes that
are normally transient, like /dev/tap* and /dev/pts*, as long as they clean
them up afterwards.
However, tests that require this variable have a relaxed cleanup requirement;
they must recreate any devices that they destroyed, but not necessarily with
the same devnames.
.It allow_sysctl_side_effects
Enables tests that change globally significant
.Xr sysctl 8
variables.
The tests will undo any changes in their cleanup phases.
.It disks
Must be set to a space delimited list of disk device nodes.
Tests that need destructive access to disks must use these devices.
Tests are not required to preserve any data present on these disks.
.It fibs
Must be set to a space delimited list of FIBs (routing tables).
Tests that need to modify a routing table may use any of these.
Tests will cleanup any new routes that they create.
.El
.Ss What to do if something fails?
If there is
.Em any failure
during the execution of the test suite, please consider reporting it to the
.Fx
developers so that the failure can be analyzed and fixed.
To do so, either send a message to the appropriate mailing list or file a
problem report.
For more details please refer to:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Lk https://lists.freebsd.org/ "FreeBSD Mailing Lists"
.It
.Lk https://www.freebsd.org/support.html "Problem Reporting"
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact -width usrXlocalXetcXkyuaXkyuaXconfXX
.It Pa /usr/local/etc/kyua/kyua.conf
System-wide configuration file for
.Xr kyua 1 .
.It Pa ~/.kyua/kyua.conf
User-specific configuration file for
.Xr kyua 1 ;
overrides the system file.
.It Pa ~/.kyua/store.db
Default result database used by Kyua.
.It Pa /usr/tests/
Location of the
.Fx
Test Suite.
.It Pa /usr/tests/Kyuafile
Top-level test suite definition file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1 ,
.Xr build 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fx
Test Suite first appeared in
.Fx 10.1 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Nx 6.0
and was later ported to
.Fx 10.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Julio Merino Aq Mt jmmv@FreeBSD.org
