Documentation/powerpc/papr_hcalls.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===========================
Hypercall Op-codes (hcalls)
===========================

Overview
=========

Virtualization on 64-bit Power Book3S Platforms is based on the PAPR
specification [1]_ which describes the run-time environment for a guest
operating system and how it should interact with the hypervisor for
privileged operations. Currently there are two PAPR compliant hypervisors:

- **IBM PowerVM (PHYP)**: IBM's proprietary hypervisor that supports AIX,
  IBM-i and  Linux as supported guests (termed as Logical Partitions
  or LPARS). It supports the full PAPR specification.

- **Qemu/KVM**: Supports PPC64 linux guests running on a PPC64 linux host.
  Though it only implements a subset of PAPR specification called LoPAPR [2]_.

On PPC64 arch a guest kernel running on top of a PAPR hypervisor is called
a *pSeries guest*. A pseries guest runs in a supervisor mode (HV=0) and must
issue hypercalls to the hypervisor whenever it needs to perform an action
that is hypervisor priviledged [3]_ or for other services managed by the
hypervisor.

Hence a Hypercall (hcall) is essentially a request by the pseries guest
asking hypervisor to perform a privileged operation on behalf of the guest. The
guest issues a with necessary input operands. The hypervisor after performing
the privilege operation returns a status code and output operands back to the
guest.

HCALL ABI
=========
The ABI specification for a hcall between a pseries guest and PAPR hypervisor
is covered in section 14.5.3 of ref [2]_. Switch to the  Hypervisor context is
done via the instruction **HVCS** that expects the Opcode for hcall is set in *r3*
and any in-arguments for the hcall are provided in registers *r4-r12*. If values
have to be passed through a memory buffer, the data stored in that buffer should be
in Big-endian byte order.

Once control is returns back to the guest after hypervisor has serviced the
'HVCS' instruction the return value of the hcall is available in *r3* and any
out values are returned in registers *r4-r12*. Again like in case of in-arguments,
any out values stored in a memory buffer will be in Big-endian byte order.

Powerpc arch code provides convenient wrappers named **plpar_hcall_xxx** defined
in a arch specific header [4]_ to issue hcalls from the linux kernel
running as pseries guest.

Register Conventions
====================

Any hcall should follow same register convention as described in section 2.2.1.1
of "64-Bit ELF V2 ABI Specification: Power Architecture"[5]_. Table below
summarizes these conventions:

+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
| Register |Volatile  |  Purpose                                  |
| Range    |(Y/N)     |                                           |
+==========+==========+===========================================+
|   r0     |    Y     |  Optional-usage                           |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r1     |    N     |  Stack Pointer                            |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r2     |    N     |  TOC                                      |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r3     |    Y     |  hcall opcode/return value                |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  r4-r10  |    Y     |  in and out values                        |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r11    |    Y     |  Optional-usage/Environmental pointer     |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r12    |    Y     |  Optional-usage/Function entry address at |
|          |          |  global entry point                       |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r13    |    N     |  Thread-Pointer                           |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  r14-r31 |    N     |  Local Variables                          |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|    LR    |    Y     |  Link Register                            |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   CTR    |    Y     |  Loop Counter                             |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   XER    |    Y     |  Fixed-point exception register.          |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CR0-1   |    Y     |  Condition register fields.               |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CR2-4   |    N     |  Condition register fields.               |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CR5-7   |    Y     |  Condition register fields.               |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  Others  |    N     |                                           |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+

DRC & DRC Indexes
=================
::

     DR1                                  Guest
     +--+        +------------+         +---------+
     |  | <----> |            |         |  User   |
     +--+  DRC1  |            |   DRC   |  Space  |
                 |    PAPR    |  Index  +---------+
     DR2         | Hypervisor |         |         |
     +--+        |            | <-----> |  Kernel |
     |  | <----> |            |  Hcall  |         |
     +--+  DRC2  +------------+         +---------+

PAPR hypervisor terms shared hardware resources like PCI devices, NVDIMMs etc
available for use by LPARs as Dynamic Resource (DR). When a DR is allocated to
an LPAR, PHYP creates a data-structure called Dynamic Resource Connector (DRC)
to manage LPAR access. An LPAR refers to a DRC via an opaque 32-bit number
called DRC-Index. The DRC-index value is provided to the LPAR via device-tree
where its present as an attribute in the device tree node associated with the
DR.

HCALL Return-values
===================

After servicing the hcall, hypervisor sets the return-value in *r3* indicating
success or failure of the hcall. In case of a failure an error code indicates
the cause for error. These codes are defined and documented in arch specific
header [4]_.

In some cases a hcall can potentially take a long time and need to be issued
multiple times in order to be completely serviced. These hcalls will usually
accept an opaque value *continue-token* within there argument list and a
return value of *H_CONTINUE* indicates that hypervisor hasn't still finished
servicing the hcall yet.

To make such hcalls the guest need to set *continue-token == 0* for the
initial call and use the hypervisor returned value of *continue-token*
for each subsequent hcall until hypervisor returns a non *H_CONTINUE*
return value.

HCALL Op-codes
==============

Below is a partial list of HCALLs that are supported by PHYP. For the
corresponding opcode values please look into the arch specific header [4]_:

**H_SCM_READ_METADATA**

| Input: *drcIndex, offset, buffer-address, numBytesToRead*
| Out: *numBytesRead*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_Hardware*

Given a DRC Index of an NVDIMM, read N-bytes from the the metadata area
associated with it, at a specified offset and copy it to provided buffer.
The metadata area stores configuration information such as label information,
bad-blocks etc. The metadata area is located out-of-band of NVDIMM storage
area hence a separate access semantics is provided.

**H_SCM_WRITE_METADATA**

| Input: *drcIndex, offset, data, numBytesToWrite*
| Out: *None*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P4, H_Hardware*

Given a DRC Index of an NVDIMM, write N-bytes to the metadata area
associated with it, at the specified offset and from the provided buffer.

**H_SCM_BIND_MEM**

| Input: *drcIndex, startingScmBlockIndex, numScmBlocksToBind,*
| *targetLogicalMemoryAddress, continue-token*
| Out: *continue-token, targetLogicalMemoryAddress, numScmBlocksToBound*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_P4, H_Overlap,*
| *H_Too_Big, H_P5, H_Busy*

Given a DRC-Index of an NVDIMM, map a continuous SCM blocks range
*(startingScmBlockIndex, startingScmBlockIndex+numScmBlocksToBind)* to the guest
at *targetLogicalMemoryAddress* within guest physical address space. In
case *targetLogicalMemoryAddress == 0xFFFFFFFF_FFFFFFFF* then hypervisor
assigns a target address to the guest. The HCALL can fail if the Guest has
an active PTE entry to the SCM block being bound.

**H_SCM_UNBIND_MEM**
| Input: drcIndex, startingScmLogicalMemoryAddress, numScmBlocksToUnbind
| Out: numScmBlocksUnbound
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_In_Use, H_Overlap,*
| *H_Busy, H_LongBusyOrder1mSec, H_LongBusyOrder10mSec*

Given a DRC-Index of an NVDimm, unmap *numScmBlocksToUnbind* SCM blocks starting
at *startingScmLogicalMemoryAddress* from guest physical address space. The
HCALL can fail if the Guest has an active PTE entry to the SCM block being
unbound.

**H_SCM_QUERY_BLOCK_MEM_BINDING**

| Input: *drcIndex, scmBlockIndex*
| Out: *Guest-Physical-Address*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_NotFound*

Given a DRC-Index and an SCM Block index return the guest physical address to
which the SCM block is mapped to.

**H_SCM_QUERY_LOGICAL_MEM_BINDING**

| Input: *Guest-Physical-Address*
| Out: *drcIndex, scmBlockIndex*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_NotFound*

Given a guest physical address return which DRC Index and SCM block is mapped
to that address.

**H_SCM_UNBIND_ALL**

| Input: *scmTargetScope, drcIndex*
| Out: *None*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_In_Use, H_Busy,*
| *H_LongBusyOrder1mSec, H_LongBusyOrder10mSec*

Depending on the Target scope unmap all SCM blocks belonging to all NVDIMMs
or all SCM blocks belonging to a single NVDIMM identified by its drcIndex
from the LPAR memory.

**H_SCM_HEALTH**

| Input: drcIndex
| Out: *health-bitmap (r4), health-bit-valid-bitmap (r5)*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_Hardware*

Given a DRC Index return the info on predictive failure and overall health of
the PMEM device. The asserted bits in the health-bitmap indicate one or more states
(described in table below) of the PMEM device and health-bit-valid-bitmap indicate
which bits in health-bitmap are valid. The bits are reported in
reverse bit ordering for example a value of 0xC400000000000000
indicates bits 0, 1, and 5 are valid.

Health Bitmap Flags:

+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Bit |               Definition                                              |
+======+=======================================================================+
|  00  | PMEM device is unable to persist memory contents.                     |
|      | If the system is powered down, nothing will be saved.                 |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  01  | PMEM device failed to persist memory contents. Either contents were   |
|      | not saved successfully on power down or were not restored properly on |
|      | power up.                                                             |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  02  | PMEM device contents are persisted from previous IPL. The data from   |
|      | the last boot were successfully restored.                             |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  03  | PMEM device contents are not persisted from previous IPL. There was no|
|      | data to restore from the last boot.                                   |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  04  | PMEM device memory life remaining is critically low                   |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  05  | PMEM device will be garded off next IPL due to failure                |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  06  | PMEM device contents cannot persist due to current platform health    |
|      | status. A hardware failure may prevent data from being saved or       |
|      | restored.                                                             |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  07  | PMEM device is unable to persist memory contents in certain conditions|
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  08  | PMEM device is encrypted                                              |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  09  | PMEM device has successfully completed a requested erase or secure    |
|      | erase procedure.                                                      |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|10:63 | Reserved / Unused                                                     |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

**H_SCM_PERFORMANCE_STATS**

| Input: drcIndex, resultBuffer Addr
| Out: None
| Return Value:  *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_Unsupported, H_Hardware, H_Authority, H_Privilege*

Given a DRC Index collect the performance statistics for NVDIMM and copy them
to the resultBuffer.

References
==========
.. [1] "Power Architecture Platform Reference"
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_Architecture_Platform_Reference
.. [2] "Linux on Power Architecture Platform Reference"
       https://members.openpowerfoundation.org/document/dl/469
.. [3] "Definitions and Notation" Book III-Section 14.5.3
       https://openpowerfoundation.org/?resource_lib=power-isa-version-3-0
.. [4] arch/powerpc/include/asm/hvcall.h
.. [5] "64-Bit ELF V2 ABI Specification: Power Architecture"
       https://openpowerfoundation.org/?resource_lib=64-bit-elf-v2-abi-specification-power-architecture

Commit message:

powerpc/papr_scm: Implement support for H_SCM_FLUSH hcall
Add support for ND_REGION_ASYNC capability if the device tree
indicates 'ibm,hcall-flush-required' property in the NVDIMM node.
Flush is done by issuing H_SCM_FLUSH hcall to the hypervisor.

If the flush request failed, the hypervisor is expected to
to reflect the problem in the subsequent nvdimm H_SCM_HEALTH call.

This patch prevents mmap of namespaces with MAP_SYNC flag if the
nvdimm requires an explicit flush[1].

References:
[1] https://github.com/avocado-framework-tests/avocado-misc-tests/blob/master/memory/ndctl.py.data/map_sync.c

Signed-off-by: Shivaprasad G Bhat <sbhat@linux.ibm.com>
Reviewed-by: Aneesh Kumar K.V <aneesh.kumar@linux.ibm.com>
[mpe: Use unsigned long / long instead of uint64_t/int64_t]
Signed-off-by: Michael Ellerman <mpe@ellerman.id.au>
Link: https://lore.kernel.org/r/161703936121.36.7260632399582101498.stgit@e1fbed493c87

Documentation/powerpc/papr_hcalls.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===========================
Hypercall Op-codes (hcalls)
===========================

Overview
=========

Virtualization on 64-bit Power Book3S Platforms is based on the PAPR
specification [1]_ which describes the run-time environment for a guest
operating system and how it should interact with the hypervisor for
privileged operations. Currently there are two PAPR compliant hypervisors:

- **IBM PowerVM (PHYP)**: IBM's proprietary hypervisor that supports AIX,
  IBM-i and  Linux as supported guests (termed as Logical Partitions
  or LPARS). It supports the full PAPR specification.

- **Qemu/KVM**: Supports PPC64 linux guests running on a PPC64 linux host.
  Though it only implements a subset of PAPR specification called LoPAPR [2]_.

On PPC64 arch a guest kernel running on top of a PAPR hypervisor is called
a *pSeries guest*. A pseries guest runs in a supervisor mode (HV=0) and must
issue hypercalls to the hypervisor whenever it needs to perform an action
that is hypervisor priviledged [3]_ or for other services managed by the
hypervisor.

Hence a Hypercall (hcall) is essentially a request by the pseries guest
asking hypervisor to perform a privileged operation on behalf of the guest. The
guest issues a with necessary input operands. The hypervisor after performing
the privilege operation returns a status code and output operands back to the
guest.

HCALL ABI
=========
The ABI specification for a hcall between a pseries guest and PAPR hypervisor
is covered in section 14.5.3 of ref [2]_. Switch to the  Hypervisor context is
done via the instruction **HVCS** that expects the Opcode for hcall is set in *r3*
and any in-arguments for the hcall are provided in registers *r4-r12*. If values
have to be passed through a memory buffer, the data stored in that buffer should be
in Big-endian byte order.

Once control is returns back to the guest after hypervisor has serviced the
'HVCS' instruction the return value of the hcall is available in *r3* and any
out values are returned in registers *r4-r12*. Again like in case of in-arguments,
any out values stored in a memory buffer will be in Big-endian byte order.

Powerpc arch code provides convenient wrappers named **plpar_hcall_xxx** defined
in a arch specific header [4]_ to issue hcalls from the linux kernel
running as pseries guest.

Register Conventions
====================

Any hcall should follow same register convention as described in section 2.2.1.1
of "64-Bit ELF V2 ABI Specification: Power Architecture"[5]_. Table below
summarizes these conventions:

+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
| Register |Volatile  |  Purpose                                  |
| Range    |(Y/N)     |                                           |
+==========+==========+===========================================+
|   r0     |    Y     |  Optional-usage                           |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r1     |    N     |  Stack Pointer                            |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r2     |    N     |  TOC                                      |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r3     |    Y     |  hcall opcode/return value                |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  r4-r10  |    Y     |  in and out values                        |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r11    |    Y     |  Optional-usage/Environmental pointer     |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r12    |    Y     |  Optional-usage/Function entry address at |
|          |          |  global entry point                       |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   r13    |    N     |  Thread-Pointer                           |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  r14-r31 |    N     |  Local Variables                          |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|    LR    |    Y     |  Link Register                            |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   CTR    |    Y     |  Loop Counter                             |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|   XER    |    Y     |  Fixed-point exception register.          |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CR0-1   |    Y     |  Condition register fields.               |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CR2-4   |    N     |  Condition register fields.               |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CR5-7   |    Y     |  Condition register fields.               |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+
|  Others  |    N     |                                           |
+----------+----------+-------------------------------------------+

DRC & DRC Indexes
=================
::

     DR1                                  Guest
     +--+        +------------+         +---------+
     |  | <----> |            |         |  User   |
     +--+  DRC1  |            |   DRC   |  Space  |
                 |    PAPR    |  Index  +---------+
     DR2         | Hypervisor |         |         |
     +--+        |            | <-----> |  Kernel |
     |  | <----> |            |  Hcall  |         |
     +--+  DRC2  +------------+         +---------+

PAPR hypervisor terms shared hardware resources like PCI devices, NVDIMMs etc
available for use by LPARs as Dynamic Resource (DR). When a DR is allocated to
an LPAR, PHYP creates a data-structure called Dynamic Resource Connector (DRC)
to manage LPAR access. An LPAR refers to a DRC via an opaque 32-bit number
called DRC-Index. The DRC-index value is provided to the LPAR via device-tree
where its present as an attribute in the device tree node associated with the
DR.

HCALL Return-values
===================

After servicing the hcall, hypervisor sets the return-value in *r3* indicating
success or failure of the hcall. In case of a failure an error code indicates
the cause for error. These codes are defined and documented in arch specific
header [4]_.

In some cases a hcall can potentially take a long time and need to be issued
multiple times in order to be completely serviced. These hcalls will usually
accept an opaque value *continue-token* within there argument list and a
return value of *H_CONTINUE* indicates that hypervisor hasn't still finished
servicing the hcall yet.

To make such hcalls the guest need to set *continue-token == 0* for the
initial call and use the hypervisor returned value of *continue-token*
for each subsequent hcall until hypervisor returns a non *H_CONTINUE*
return value.

HCALL Op-codes
==============

Below is a partial list of HCALLs that are supported by PHYP. For the
corresponding opcode values please look into the arch specific header [4]_:

**H_SCM_READ_METADATA**

| Input: *drcIndex, offset, buffer-address, numBytesToRead*
| Out: *numBytesRead*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_Hardware*

Given a DRC Index of an NVDIMM, read N-bytes from the the metadata area
associated with it, at a specified offset and copy it to provided buffer.
The metadata area stores configuration information such as label information,
bad-blocks etc. The metadata area is located out-of-band of NVDIMM storage
area hence a separate access semantics is provided.

**H_SCM_WRITE_METADATA**

| Input: *drcIndex, offset, data, numBytesToWrite*
| Out: *None*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P4, H_Hardware*

Given a DRC Index of an NVDIMM, write N-bytes to the metadata area
associated with it, at the specified offset and from the provided buffer.

**H_SCM_BIND_MEM**

| Input: *drcIndex, startingScmBlockIndex, numScmBlocksToBind,*
| *targetLogicalMemoryAddress, continue-token*
| Out: *continue-token, targetLogicalMemoryAddress, numScmBlocksToBound*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_P4, H_Overlap,*
| *H_Too_Big, H_P5, H_Busy*

Given a DRC-Index of an NVDIMM, map a continuous SCM blocks range
*(startingScmBlockIndex, startingScmBlockIndex+numScmBlocksToBind)* to the guest
at *targetLogicalMemoryAddress* within guest physical address space. In
case *targetLogicalMemoryAddress == 0xFFFFFFFF_FFFFFFFF* then hypervisor
assigns a target address to the guest. The HCALL can fail if the Guest has
an active PTE entry to the SCM block being bound.

**H_SCM_UNBIND_MEM**
| Input: drcIndex, startingScmLogicalMemoryAddress, numScmBlocksToUnbind
| Out: numScmBlocksUnbound
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_In_Use, H_Overlap,*
| *H_Busy, H_LongBusyOrder1mSec, H_LongBusyOrder10mSec*

Given a DRC-Index of an NVDimm, unmap *numScmBlocksToUnbind* SCM blocks starting
at *startingScmLogicalMemoryAddress* from guest physical address space. The
HCALL can fail if the Guest has an active PTE entry to the SCM block being
unbound.

**H_SCM_QUERY_BLOCK_MEM_BINDING**

| Input: *drcIndex, scmBlockIndex*
| Out: *Guest-Physical-Address*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_NotFound*

Given a DRC-Index and an SCM Block index return the guest physical address to
which the SCM block is mapped to.

**H_SCM_QUERY_LOGICAL_MEM_BINDING**

| Input: *Guest-Physical-Address*
| Out: *drcIndex, scmBlockIndex*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_NotFound*

Given a guest physical address return which DRC Index and SCM block is mapped
to that address.

**H_SCM_UNBIND_ALL**

| Input: *scmTargetScope, drcIndex*
| Out: *None*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_P3, H_In_Use, H_Busy,*
| *H_LongBusyOrder1mSec, H_LongBusyOrder10mSec*

Depending on the Target scope unmap all SCM blocks belonging to all NVDIMMs
or all SCM blocks belonging to a single NVDIMM identified by its drcIndex
from the LPAR memory.

**H_SCM_HEALTH**

| Input: drcIndex
| Out: *health-bitmap (r4), health-bit-valid-bitmap (r5)*
| Return Value: *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_Hardware*

Given a DRC Index return the info on predictive failure and overall health of
the PMEM device. The asserted bits in the health-bitmap indicate one or more states
(described in table below) of the PMEM device and health-bit-valid-bitmap indicate
which bits in health-bitmap are valid. The bits are reported in
reverse bit ordering for example a value of 0xC400000000000000
indicates bits 0, 1, and 5 are valid.

Health Bitmap Flags:

+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Bit |               Definition                                              |
+======+=======================================================================+
|  00  | PMEM device is unable to persist memory contents.                     |
|      | If the system is powered down, nothing will be saved.                 |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  01  | PMEM device failed to persist memory contents. Either contents were   |
|      | not saved successfully on power down or were not restored properly on |
|      | power up.                                                             |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  02  | PMEM device contents are persisted from previous IPL. The data from   |
|      | the last boot were successfully restored.                             |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  03  | PMEM device contents are not persisted from previous IPL. There was no|
|      | data to restore from the last boot.                                   |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  04  | PMEM device memory life remaining is critically low                   |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  05  | PMEM device will be garded off next IPL due to failure                |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  06  | PMEM device contents cannot persist due to current platform health    |
|      | status. A hardware failure may prevent data from being saved or       |
|      | restored.                                                             |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  07  | PMEM device is unable to persist memory contents in certain conditions|
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  08  | PMEM device is encrypted                                              |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  09  | PMEM device has successfully completed a requested erase or secure    |
|      | erase procedure.                                                      |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|10:63 | Reserved / Unused                                                     |
+------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

**H_SCM_PERFORMANCE_STATS**

| Input: drcIndex, resultBuffer Addr
| Out: None
| Return Value:  *H_Success, H_Parameter, H_Unsupported, H_Hardware, H_Authority, H_Privilege*

Given a DRC Index collect the performance statistics for NVDIMM and copy them
to the resultBuffer.

**H_SCM_FLUSH**

| Input: *drcIndex, continue-token*
| Out: *continue-token*
| Return Value: *H_SUCCESS, H_Parameter, H_P2, H_BUSY*

Given a DRC Index Flush the data to backend NVDIMM device.

The hcall returns H_BUSY when the flush takes longer time and the hcall needs
to be issued multiple times in order to be completely serviced. The
*continue-token* from the output to be passed in the argument list of
subsequent hcalls to the hypervisor until the hcall is completely serviced
at which point H_SUCCESS or other error is returned by the hypervisor.

References
==========
.. [1] "Power Architecture Platform Reference"
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_Architecture_Platform_Reference
.. [2] "Linux on Power Architecture Platform Reference"
       https://members.openpowerfoundation.org/document/dl/469
.. [3] "Definitions and Notation" Book III-Section 14.5.3
       https://openpowerfoundation.org/?resource_lib=power-isa-version-3-0
.. [4] arch/powerpc/include/asm/hvcall.h
.. [5] "64-Bit ELF V2 ABI Specification: Power Architecture"
       https://openpowerfoundation.org/?resource_lib=64-bit-elf-v2-abi-specification-power-architecture
