Documentation/vm/index.rst, before:

=====================================
Linux Memory Management Documentation
=====================================

This is a collection of documents about Linux memory management (mm) subsystem.

User guides for MM features
===========================

The following documents provide guides for controlling and tuning
various features of the Linux memory management

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   swap_numa
   zswap

Kernel developers MM documentation
==================================

The below documents describe MM internals with different level of
details ranging from notes and mailing list responses to elaborate
descriptions of data structures and algorithms.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   active_mm
   balance
   cleancache
   frontswap
   highmem
   hmm
   hwpoison
   hugetlbfs_reserv
   ksm
   mmu_notifier
   numa
   overcommit-accounting
   page_migration
   page_frags
   page_owner
   remap_file_pages
   slub
   split_page_table_lock
   transhuge
   unevictable-lru
   z3fold
   zsmalloc

Commit message:

Link the memory allocation guide from the MM docs
I just went looking for the memory allocation guide in the MM docs instead
of in the core API.  For the benefit of the next person who makes that
mistake, link to it from the MM docs.

Signed-off-by: Matthew Wilcox <willy@infradead.org>
Acked-by: Mike Rapoport <rppt@linux.ibm.com>
Signed-off-by: Jonathan Corbet <corbet@lwn.net>

Documentation/vm/index.rst, after:

=====================================
Linux Memory Management Documentation
=====================================

This is a collection of documents about the Linux memory management (mm)
subsystem.  If you are looking for advice on simply allocating memory,
see the :ref:`memory-allocation`.

User guides for MM features
===========================

The following documents provide guides for controlling and tuning
various features of the Linux memory management

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   swap_numa
   zswap

Kernel developers MM documentation
==================================

The below documents describe MM internals with different level of
details ranging from notes and mailing list responses to elaborate
descriptions of data structures and algorithms.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   active_mm
   balance
   cleancache
   frontswap
   highmem
   hmm
   hwpoison
   hugetlbfs_reserv
   ksm
   mmu_notifier
   numa
   overcommit-accounting
   page_migration
   page_frags
   page_owner
   remap_file_pages
   slub
   split_page_table_lock
   transhuge
   unevictable-lru
   z3fold
   zsmalloc
