=pod

=head1 NAME

BIO_hostserv_priorities,
BIO_parse_hostserv
- utility routines to parse a standard host and service string

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/bio.h>

 enum BIO_hostserv_priorities {
     BIO_PARSE_PRIO_HOST, BIO_PARSE_PRIO_SERV
 };
 int BIO_parse_hostserv(const char *hostserv, char **host, char **service,
                        enum BIO_hostserv_priorities hostserv_prio);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

BIO_parse_hostserv() will parse the information given in B<hostserv>,
create strings with the host name and service name and give those
back via B<host> and B<service>.  Those will need to be freed after
they are used.  B<hostserv_prio> helps determine if B<hostserv> shall
be interpreted primarily as a host name or a service name in ambiguous
cases.

The syntax the BIO_parse_hostserv() recognises is:

 host + ':' + service
 host + ':' + '*'
 host + ':'
        ':' + service
 '*'  + ':' + service
 host
 service

The host part can be a name or an IP address.  If it's a IPv6
address, it MUST be enclosed in brackets, such as '[::1]'.

The service part can  be a service name or its port number.

The returned values will depend on the given B<hostserv> string
and B<hostserv_prio>, as follows:

 host + ':' + service  => *host = "host", *service = "service"
 host + ':' + '*'      => *host = "host", *service = NULL
 host + ':'            => *host = "host", *service = NULL
        ':' + service  => *host = NULL, *service = "service"
  '*' + ':' + service  => *host = NULL, *service = "service"

 in case no ':' is present in the string, the result depends on
 hostserv_prio, as follows:

 when hostserv_prio == BIO_PARSE_PRIO_HOST
 host                 => *host = "host", *service untouched

 when hostserv_prio == BIO_PARSE_PRIO_SERV
 service              => *host untouched, *service = "service"

=head1 RETURN VALUES

BIO_parse_hostserv() returns 1 on success or 0 on error.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<BIO_ADDRINFO(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
