=pod

=head1 NAME

BIO_lookup_type,
BIO_ADDRINFO, BIO_ADDRINFO_next, BIO_ADDRINFO_free,
BIO_ADDRINFO_family, BIO_ADDRINFO_socktype, BIO_ADDRINFO_protocol,
BIO_ADDRINFO_address,
BIO_lookup_ex,
BIO_lookup
- BIO_ADDRINFO type and routines

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <sys/types.h>
 #include <openssl/bio.h>

 typedef union bio_addrinfo_st BIO_ADDRINFO;

 enum BIO_lookup_type {
     BIO_LOOKUP_CLIENT, BIO_LOOKUP_SERVER
 };

 int BIO_lookup_ex(const char *host, const char *service, int lookup_type,
                   int family, int socktype, int protocol, BIO_ADDRINFO **res);
 int BIO_lookup(const char *node, const char *service,
                enum BIO_lookup_type lookup_type,
                int family, int socktype, BIO_ADDRINFO **res);

 const BIO_ADDRINFO *BIO_ADDRINFO_next(const BIO_ADDRINFO *bai);
 int BIO_ADDRINFO_family(const BIO_ADDRINFO *bai);
 int BIO_ADDRINFO_socktype(const BIO_ADDRINFO *bai);
 int BIO_ADDRINFO_protocol(const BIO_ADDRINFO *bai);
 const BIO_ADDR *BIO_ADDRINFO_address(const BIO_ADDRINFO *bai);
 void BIO_ADDRINFO_free(BIO_ADDRINFO *bai);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<BIO_ADDRINFO> type is a wrapper for address information
types provided on your platform.

B<BIO_ADDRINFO> normally forms a chain of several that can be
picked at one by one.

BIO_lookup_ex() looks up a specified B<host> and B<service>, and
uses B<lookup_type> to determine what the default address should
be if B<host> is B<NULL>. B<family>, B<socktype> and B<protocol> are used to
determine what protocol family, socket type and protocol should be used for
the lookup.  B<family> can be any of AF_INET, AF_INET6, AF_UNIX and
AF_UNSPEC. B<socktype> can be SOCK_STREAM, SOCK_DGRAM or 0. Specifying 0
indicates that any type can be used. B<protocol> specifies a protocol such as
IPPROTO_TCP, IPPROTO_UDP or IPPORTO_SCTP. If set to 0 than any protocol can be
used. B<res> points at a pointer to hold the start of a B<BIO_ADDRINFO>
chain.

For the family B<AF_UNIX>, BIO_lookup_ex() will ignore the B<service>
parameter and expects the B<node> parameter to hold the path to the
socket file.

BIO_lookup() does the same as BIO_lookup_ex() but does not provide the ability
to select based on the protocol (any protocol may be returned).

BIO_ADDRINFO_family() returns the family of the given
B<BIO_ADDRINFO>.  The result will be one of the constants
AF_INET, AF_INET6 and AF_UNIX.

BIO_ADDRINFO_socktype() returns the socket type of the given
B<BIO_ADDRINFO>.  The result will be one of the constants
SOCK_STREAM and SOCK_DGRAM.

BIO_ADDRINFO_protocol() returns the protocol id of the given
B<BIO_ADDRINFO>.  The result will be one of the constants
IPPROTO_TCP and IPPROTO_UDP.

BIO_ADDRINFO_address() returns the underlying B<BIO_ADDR>
of the given B<BIO_ADDRINFO>.

BIO_ADDRINFO_next() returns the next B<BIO_ADDRINFO> in the chain
from the given one.

BIO_ADDRINFO_free() frees the chain of B<BIO_ADDRINFO> starting
with the given one.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

BIO_lookup_ex() and BIO_lookup() return 1 on success and 0 when an error
occurred, and will leave an error indication on the OpenSSL error stack in that
case.

All other functions described here return 0 or B<NULL> when the
information they should return isn't available.

=head1 NOTES

The BIO_lookup_ex() implementation uses the platform provided getaddrinfo()
function. On Linux it is known that specifying 0 for the protocol will not
return any SCTP based addresses when calling getaddrinfo(). Therefore if an SCTP
address is required then the B<protocol> parameter to BIO_lookup_ex() should be
explicitly set to IPPROTO_SCTP. The same may be true on other platforms.

=head1 HISTORY

The BIO_lookup_ex() function was added in OpenSSL 1.1.1.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2017 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
