=pod

=head1 NAME

CMS_add0_cert, CMS_add1_cert, CMS_get1_certs, CMS_add0_crl, CMS_add1_crl, CMS_get1_crls
- CMS certificate and CRL utility functions

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/cms.h>

 int CMS_add0_cert(CMS_ContentInfo *cms, X509 *cert);
 int CMS_add1_cert(CMS_ContentInfo *cms, X509 *cert);
 STACK_OF(X509) *CMS_get1_certs(CMS_ContentInfo *cms);

 int CMS_add0_crl(CMS_ContentInfo *cms, X509_CRL *crl);
 int CMS_add1_crl(CMS_ContentInfo *cms, X509_CRL *crl);
 STACK_OF(X509_CRL) *CMS_get1_crls(CMS_ContentInfo *cms);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

CMS_add0_cert() and CMS_add1_cert() add certificate B<cert> to B<cms>.
must be of type signed data or enveloped data.

CMS_get1_certs() returns all certificates in B<cms>.

CMS_add0_crl() and CMS_add1_crl() add CRL B<crl> to B<cms>. CMS_get1_crls()
returns any CRLs in B<cms>.

=head1 NOTES

The CMS_ContentInfo structure B<cms> must be of type signed data or enveloped
data or an error will be returned.

For signed data certificates and CRLs are added to the B<certificates> and
B<crls> fields of SignedData structure. For enveloped data they are added to
B<OriginatorInfo>.

As the B<0> implies CMS_add0_cert() adds B<cert> internally to B<cms> and it
must not be freed up after the call as opposed to CMS_add1_cert() where B<cert>
must be freed up.

The same certificate or CRL must not be added to the same cms structure more
than once.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

CMS_add0_cert(), CMS_add1_cert() and CMS_add0_crl() and CMS_add1_crl() return
1 for success and 0 for failure.

CMS_get1_certs() and CMS_get1_crls() return the STACK of certificates or CRLs
or NULL if there are none or an error occurs. The only error which will occur
in practice is if the B<cms> type is invalid.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ERR_get_error(3)>,
L<CMS_sign(3)>,
L<CMS_encrypt(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2008-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
