=pod

=head1 NAME

d2i_PrivateKey, d2i_PublicKey, d2i_AutoPrivateKey,
i2d_PrivateKey, i2d_PublicKey,
d2i_PrivateKey_bio, d2i_PrivateKey_fp
- decode and encode functions for reading and saving EVP_PKEY structures

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/evp.h>

 EVP_PKEY *d2i_PrivateKey(int type, EVP_PKEY **a, const unsigned char **pp,
                          long length);
 EVP_PKEY *d2i_PublicKey(int type, EVP_PKEY **a, const unsigned char **pp,
                         long length);
 EVP_PKEY *d2i_AutoPrivateKey(EVP_PKEY **a, const unsigned char **pp,
                              long length);
 int i2d_PrivateKey(EVP_PKEY *a, unsigned char **pp);
 int i2d_PublicKey(EVP_PKEY *a, unsigned char **pp);

 EVP_PKEY *d2i_PrivateKey_bio(BIO *bp, EVP_PKEY **a);
 EVP_PKEY *d2i_PrivateKey_fp(FILE *fp, EVP_PKEY **a)

=head1 DESCRIPTION

d2i_PrivateKey() decodes a private key using algorithm B<type>. It attempts to
use any key specific format or PKCS#8 unencrypted PrivateKeyInfo format. The
B<type> parameter should be a public key algorithm constant such as
B<EVP_PKEY_RSA>. An error occurs if the decoded key does not match B<type>.
d2i_PublicKey() does the same for public keys.

d2i_AutoPrivateKey() is similar to d2i_PrivateKey() except it attempts to
automatically detect the private key format.

i2d_PrivateKey() encodes B<key>. It uses a key specific format or, if none is
defined for that key type, PKCS#8 unencrypted PrivateKeyInfo format.
i2d_PublicKey() does the same for public keys.

These functions are similar to the d2i_X509() functions; see L<d2i_X509(3)>.

=head1 NOTES

All these functions use DER format and unencrypted keys. Applications wishing
to encrypt or decrypt private keys should use other functions such as
d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey() instead.

If the B<*a> is not NULL when calling d2i_PrivateKey() or d2i_AutoPrivateKey()
(i.e. an existing structure is being reused) and the key format is PKCS#8
then B<*a> will be freed and replaced on a successful call.

To decode a key with type B<EVP_PKEY_EC>, d2i_PublicKey() requires B<*a> to be
a non-NULL EVP_PKEY structure assigned an EC_KEY structure referencing the proper
EC_GROUP.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

The d2i_PrivateKey(), d2i_AutoPrivateKey(), d2i_PrivateKey_bio(), d2i_PrivateKey_fp(),
and d2i_PublicKey() functions return a valid B<EVP_KEY> structure or B<NULL> if an
error occurs. The error code can be obtained by calling L<ERR_get_error(3)>.

i2d_PrivateKey() and i2d_PublicKey() return the number of bytes successfully
encoded or a negative value if an error occurs. The error code can be obtained
by calling L<ERR_get_error(3)>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<crypto(7)>,
L<d2i_PKCS8PrivateKey_bio(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2017-2019 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
