=pod

=head1 NAME

d2i_SSL_SESSION, i2d_SSL_SESSION - convert SSL_SESSION object from/to ASN1 representation

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 SSL_SESSION *d2i_SSL_SESSION(SSL_SESSION **a, const unsigned char **pp,
                              long length);
 int i2d_SSL_SESSION(SSL_SESSION *in, unsigned char **pp);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These functions decode and encode an SSL_SESSION object.
For encoding details see L<d2i_X509(3)>.

SSL_SESSION objects keep internal link information about the session cache
list, when being inserted into one SSL_CTX object's session cache.
One SSL_SESSION object, regardless of its reference count, must therefore
only be used with one SSL_CTX object (and the SSL objects created
from this SSL_CTX object).

=head1 RETURN VALUES

d2i_SSL_SESSION() returns a pointer to the newly allocated SSL_SESSION
object. In case of failure the NULL-pointer is returned and the error message
can be retrieved from the error stack.

i2d_SSL_SESSION() returns the size of the ASN1 representation in bytes.
When the session is not valid, B<0> is returned and no operation is performed.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>, L<SSL_SESSION_free(3)>,
L<SSL_CTX_sess_set_get_cb(3)>,
L<d2i_X509(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2001-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
