=pod

=head1 NAME

EC_KEY_get_method, EC_KEY_set_method,
EC_KEY_new, EC_KEY_get_flags, EC_KEY_set_flags, EC_KEY_clear_flags,
EC_KEY_new_by_curve_name, EC_KEY_free, EC_KEY_copy, EC_KEY_dup, EC_KEY_up_ref,
EC_KEY_get0_engine,
EC_KEY_get0_group, EC_KEY_set_group, EC_KEY_get0_private_key,
EC_KEY_set_private_key, EC_KEY_get0_public_key, EC_KEY_set_public_key,
EC_KEY_get_conv_form,
EC_KEY_set_conv_form, EC_KEY_set_asn1_flag, EC_KEY_precompute_mult,
EC_KEY_generate_key, EC_KEY_check_key, EC_KEY_set_public_key_affine_coordinates,
EC_KEY_oct2key, EC_KEY_key2buf, EC_KEY_oct2priv, EC_KEY_priv2oct,
EC_KEY_priv2buf - Functions for creating, destroying and manipulating
EC_KEY objects

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ec.h>

 EC_KEY *EC_KEY_new(void);
 int EC_KEY_get_flags(const EC_KEY *key);
 void EC_KEY_set_flags(EC_KEY *key, int flags);
 void EC_KEY_clear_flags(EC_KEY *key, int flags);
 EC_KEY *EC_KEY_new_by_curve_name(int nid);
 void EC_KEY_free(EC_KEY *key);
 EC_KEY *EC_KEY_copy(EC_KEY *dst, const EC_KEY *src);
 EC_KEY *EC_KEY_dup(const EC_KEY *src);
 int EC_KEY_up_ref(EC_KEY *key);
 ENGINE *EC_KEY_get0_engine(const EC_KEY *eckey);
 const EC_GROUP *EC_KEY_get0_group(const EC_KEY *key);
 int EC_KEY_set_group(EC_KEY *key, const EC_GROUP *group);
 const BIGNUM *EC_KEY_get0_private_key(const EC_KEY *key);
 int EC_KEY_set_private_key(EC_KEY *key, const BIGNUM *prv);
 const EC_POINT *EC_KEY_get0_public_key(const EC_KEY *key);
 int EC_KEY_set_public_key(EC_KEY *key, const EC_POINT *pub);
 point_conversion_form_t EC_KEY_get_conv_form(const EC_KEY *key);
 void EC_KEY_set_conv_form(EC_KEY *eckey, point_conversion_form_t cform);
 void EC_KEY_set_asn1_flag(EC_KEY *eckey, int asn1_flag);
 int EC_KEY_precompute_mult(EC_KEY *key, BN_CTX *ctx);
 int EC_KEY_generate_key(EC_KEY *key);
 int EC_KEY_check_key(const EC_KEY *key);
 int EC_KEY_set_public_key_affine_coordinates(EC_KEY *key, BIGNUM *x, BIGNUM *y);
 const EC_KEY_METHOD *EC_KEY_get_method(const EC_KEY *key);
 int EC_KEY_set_method(EC_KEY *key, const EC_KEY_METHOD *meth);

 int EC_KEY_oct2key(EC_KEY *eckey, const unsigned char *buf, size_t len, BN_CTX *ctx);
 size_t EC_KEY_key2buf(const EC_KEY *eckey, point_conversion_form_t form,
                       unsigned char **pbuf, BN_CTX *ctx);

 int EC_KEY_oct2priv(EC_KEY *eckey, const unsigned char *buf, size_t len);
 size_t EC_KEY_priv2oct(const EC_KEY *eckey, unsigned char *buf, size_t len);

 size_t EC_KEY_priv2buf(const EC_KEY *eckey, unsigned char **pbuf);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

An EC_KEY represents a public key and, optionally, the associated private
key. A new EC_KEY with no associated curve can be constructed by calling
EC_KEY_new(). The reference count for the newly created EC_KEY is initially
set to 1. A curve can be associated with the EC_KEY by calling
EC_KEY_set_group().

Alternatively a new EC_KEY can be constructed by calling
EC_KEY_new_by_curve_name() and supplying the nid of the associated curve. See
L<EC_GROUP_new(3)> for a description of curve names. This function simply
wraps calls to EC_KEY_new() and EC_GROUP_new_by_curve_name().

Calling EC_KEY_free() decrements the reference count for the EC_KEY object,
and if it has dropped to zero then frees the memory associated with it.  If
B<key> is NULL nothing is done.

EC_KEY_copy() copies the contents of the EC_KEY in B<src> into B<dest>.

EC_KEY_dup() creates a new EC_KEY object and copies B<ec_key> into it.

EC_KEY_up_ref() increments the reference count associated with the EC_KEY
object.

EC_KEY_get0_engine() returns a handle to the ENGINE that has been set for
this EC_KEY object.

EC_KEY_generate_key() generates a new public and private key for the supplied
B<eckey> object. B<eckey> must have an EC_GROUP object associated with it
before calling this function. The private key is a random integer (0 < priv_key
< order, where I<order> is the order of the EC_GROUP object). The public key is
an EC_POINT on the curve calculated by multiplying the generator for the
curve by the private key.

EC_KEY_check_key() performs various sanity checks on the EC_KEY object to
confirm that it is valid.

EC_KEY_set_public_key_affine_coordinates() sets the public key for B<key> based
on its affine co-ordinates; i.e., it constructs an EC_POINT object based on
the supplied B<x> and B<y> values and sets the public key to be this
EC_POINT. It also performs certain sanity checks on the key to confirm
that it is valid.

The functions EC_KEY_get0_group(), EC_KEY_set_group(),
EC_KEY_get0_private_key(), EC_KEY_set_private_key(), EC_KEY_get0_public_key(),
and EC_KEY_set_public_key() get and set the EC_GROUP object, the private key,
and the EC_POINT public key for the B<key> respectively.

The functions EC_KEY_get_conv_form() and EC_KEY_set_conv_form() get and set the
point_conversion_form for the B<key>. For a description of
point_conversion_forms please see L<EC_POINT_new(3)>.

EC_KEY_set_flags() sets the flags in the B<flags> parameter on the EC_KEY
object. Any flags that are already set are left set. The flags currently
defined are EC_FLAG_NON_FIPS_ALLOW and EC_FLAG_FIPS_CHECKED. In
addition there is the flag EC_FLAG_COFACTOR_ECDH which is specific to ECDH.
EC_KEY_get_flags() returns the current flags that are set for this EC_KEY.
EC_KEY_clear_flags() clears the flags indicated by the B<flags> parameter; all
other flags are left in their existing state.

EC_KEY_set_asn1_flag() sets the asn1_flag on the underlying EC_GROUP object
(if set). Refer to L<EC_GROUP_copy(3)> for further information on the
asn1_flag.

EC_KEY_precompute_mult() stores multiples of the underlying EC_GROUP generator
for faster point multiplication. See also L<EC_POINT_add(3)>.

EC_KEY_oct2key() and EC_KEY_key2buf() are identical to the functions
EC_POINT_oct2point() and EC_KEY_point2buf() except they use the public key
EC_POINT in B<eckey>.

EC_KEY_oct2priv() and EC_KEY_priv2oct() convert between the private key
component of B<eckey> and octet form. The octet form consists of the content
octets of the B<privateKey> OCTET STRING in an B<ECPrivateKey> ASN.1 structure.

The function EC_KEY_priv2oct() must be supplied with a buffer long enough to
store the octet form. The return value provides the number of octets stored.
Calling the function with a NULL buffer will not perform the conversion but
will just return the required buffer length.

The function EC_KEY_priv2buf() allocates a buffer of suitable length and writes
an EC_KEY to it in octet format. The allocated buffer is written to B<*pbuf>
and its length is returned. The caller must free up the allocated buffer with a
call to OPENSSL_free(). Since the allocated buffer value is written to B<*pbuf>
the B<pbuf> parameter B<MUST NOT> be B<NULL>.

EC_KEY_priv2buf() converts an EC_KEY private key into an allocated buffer.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

EC_KEY_new(), EC_KEY_new_by_curve_name() and EC_KEY_dup() return a pointer to
the newly created EC_KEY object, or NULL on error.

EC_KEY_get_flags() returns the flags associated with the EC_KEY object as an
integer.

EC_KEY_copy() returns a pointer to the destination key, or NULL on error.

EC_KEY_get0_engine() returns a pointer to an ENGINE, or NULL if it wasn't set.

EC_KEY_up_ref(), EC_KEY_set_group(), EC_KEY_set_private_key(),
EC_KEY_set_public_key(), EC_KEY_precompute_mult(), EC_KEY_generate_key(),
EC_KEY_check_key(), EC_KEY_set_public_key_affine_coordinates(),
EC_KEY_oct2key() and EC_KEY_oct2priv() return 1 on success or 0 on error.

EC_KEY_get0_group() returns the EC_GROUP associated with the EC_KEY.

EC_KEY_get0_private_key() returns the private key associated with the EC_KEY.

EC_KEY_get_conv_form() return the point_conversion_form for the EC_KEY.

EC_KEY_key2buf(), EC_KEY_priv2oct() and EC_KEY_priv2buf() return the length
of the buffer or 0 on error.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<crypto(7)>, L<EC_GROUP_new(3)>,
L<EC_GROUP_copy(3)>, L<EC_POINT_new(3)>,
L<EC_POINT_add(3)>,
L<EC_GFp_simple_method(3)>,
L<d2i_ECPKParameters(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2013-2017 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
