=pod

=head1 NAME

EVP_BytesToKey - password based encryption routine

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/evp.h>

 int EVP_BytesToKey(const EVP_CIPHER *type, const EVP_MD *md,
                    const unsigned char *salt,
                    const unsigned char *data, int datal, int count,
                    unsigned char *key, unsigned char *iv);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

EVP_BytesToKey() derives a key and IV from various parameters. B<type> is
the cipher to derive the key and IV for. B<md> is the message digest to use.
The B<salt> parameter is used as a salt in the derivation: it should point to
an 8 byte buffer or NULL if no salt is used. B<data> is a buffer containing
B<datal> bytes which is used to derive the keying data. B<count> is the
iteration count to use. The derived key and IV will be written to B<key>
and B<iv> respectively.

=head1 NOTES

A typical application of this function is to derive keying material for an
encryption algorithm from a password in the B<data> parameter.

Increasing the B<count> parameter slows down the algorithm which makes it
harder for an attacker to perform a brute force attack using a large number
of candidate passwords.

If the total key and IV length is less than the digest length and
B<MD5> is used then the derivation algorithm is compatible with PKCS#5 v1.5
otherwise a non standard extension is used to derive the extra data.

Newer applications should use a more modern algorithm such as PBKDF2 as
defined in PKCS#5v2.1 and provided by PKCS5_PBKDF2_HMAC.

=head1 KEY DERIVATION ALGORITHM

The key and IV is derived by concatenating D_1, D_2, etc until
enough data is available for the key and IV. D_i is defined as:

        D_i = HASH^count(D_(i-1) || data || salt)

where || denotes concatenation, D_0 is empty, HASH is the digest
algorithm in use, HASH^1(data) is simply HASH(data), HASH^2(data)
is HASH(HASH(data)) and so on.

The initial bytes are used for the key and the subsequent bytes for
the IV.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

If B<data> is NULL, then EVP_BytesToKey() returns the number of bytes
needed to store the derived key.
Otherwise, EVP_BytesToKey() returns the size of the derived key in bytes,
or 0 on error.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<evp(7)>, L<RAND_bytes(3)>,
L<PKCS5_PBKDF2_HMAC(3)>,
L<EVP_EncryptInit(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2001-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
