=pod

=head1 NAME

EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cbc,
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cfb,
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cfb64,
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_ecb,
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_ofb
- EVP RC5 cipher

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/evp.h>

 const EVP_CIPHER *EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cbc(void)
 const EVP_CIPHER *EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cfb(void)
 const EVP_CIPHER *EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cfb64(void)
 const EVP_CIPHER *EVP_rc5_32_12_16_ecb(void)
 const EVP_CIPHER *EVP_rc5_32_12_16_ofb(void)

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The RC5 encryption algorithm for EVP.

=over 4

=item EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cbc(),
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cfb(),
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_cfb64(),
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_ecb(),
EVP_rc5_32_12_16_ofb()

RC5 encryption algorithm in CBC, CFB, ECB and OFB modes respectively. This is a
variable key length cipher with an additional "number of rounds" parameter. By
default the key length is set to 128 bits and 12 rounds.

=back

=head1 RETURN VALUES

These functions return an B<EVP_CIPHER> structure that contains the
implementation of the symmetric cipher. See L<EVP_CIPHER_meth_new(3)> for
details of the B<EVP_CIPHER> structure.

=head1 BUGS

Currently the number of rounds in RC5 can only be set to 8, 12 or 16.
This is a limitation of the current RC5 code rather than the EVP interface.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<evp(7)>,
L<EVP_EncryptInit(3)>,
L<EVP_CIPHER_meth_new(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2017-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut

