=pod

=head1 NAME

OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms, OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers, OpenSSL_add_all_digests, EVP_cleanup -
add algorithms to internal table

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/evp.h>

Deprecated:

 # if OPENSSL_API_COMPAT < 0x10100000L
 void OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms(void);
 void OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers(void);
 void OpenSSL_add_all_digests(void);

 void EVP_cleanup(void)
# endif

=head1 DESCRIPTION

OpenSSL keeps an internal table of digest algorithms and ciphers. It uses
this table to lookup ciphers via functions such as EVP_get_cipher_byname().

OpenSSL_add_all_digests() adds all digest algorithms to the table.

OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms() adds all algorithms to the table (digests and
ciphers).

OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers() adds all encryption algorithms to the table including
password based encryption algorithms.

In versions prior to 1.1.0 EVP_cleanup() removed all ciphers and digests from
the table. It no longer has any effect in OpenSSL 1.1.0.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

None of the functions return a value.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<evp(7)>, L<EVP_DigestInit(3)>,
L<EVP_EncryptInit(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

The OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms(), OpenSSL_add_all_ciphers(),
OpenSSL_add_all_digests(), and EVP_cleanup(), functions
were deprecated in OpenSSL 1.1.0 by OPENSSL_init_crypto() and should
not be used.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2000-2017 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
