=pod

=head1 NAME

OPENSSL_load_builtin_modules, ASN1_add_oid_module, ENGINE_add_conf_module - add standard configuration modules

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/conf.h>

 void OPENSSL_load_builtin_modules(void);
 void ASN1_add_oid_module(void);
 void ENGINE_add_conf_module(void);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The function OPENSSL_load_builtin_modules() adds all the standard OpenSSL
configuration modules to the internal list. They can then be used by the
OpenSSL configuration code.

ASN1_add_oid_module() adds just the ASN1 OBJECT module.

ENGINE_add_conf_module() adds just the ENGINE configuration module.

=head1 NOTES

If the simple configuration function OPENSSL_config() is called then
OPENSSL_load_builtin_modules() is called automatically.

Applications which use the configuration functions directly will need to
call OPENSSL_load_builtin_modules() themselves I<before> any other
configuration code.

Applications should call OPENSSL_load_builtin_modules() to load all
configuration modules instead of adding modules selectively: otherwise
functionality may be missing from the application if an when new
modules are added.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

None of the functions return a value.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<config(5)>, L<OPENSSL_config(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2004-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
