=pod

=head1 NAME

OSSL_STORE_LOADER, OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX, OSSL_STORE_LOADER_new,
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_get0_engine, OSSL_STORE_LOADER_get0_scheme,
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_open, OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_ctrl,
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_expect, OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_find,
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_load, OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_eof,
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_error, OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_close,
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_free, OSSL_STORE_register_loader,
OSSL_STORE_unregister_loader, OSSL_STORE_open_fn, OSSL_STORE_ctrl_fn,
OSSL_STORE_expect_fn, OSSL_STORE_find_fn,
OSSL_STORE_load_fn, OSSL_STORE_eof_fn, OSSL_STORE_error_fn,
OSSL_STORE_close_fn - Types and functions to manipulate, register and
unregister STORE loaders for different URI schemes

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/store.h>

 typedef struct ossl_store_loader_st OSSL_STORE_LOADER;

 OSSL_STORE_LOADER *OSSL_STORE_LOADER_new(ENGINE *e, const char *scheme);
 const ENGINE *OSSL_STORE_LOADER_get0_engine(const OSSL_STORE_LOADER
                                             *store_loader);
 const char *OSSL_STORE_LOADER_get0_scheme(const OSSL_STORE_LOADER
                                           *store_loader);

 /* struct ossl_store_loader_ctx_st is defined differently by each loader */
 typedef struct ossl_store_loader_ctx_st OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX;

 typedef OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *(*OSSL_STORE_open_fn)(const char *uri,
                                                      const UI_METHOD *ui_method,
                                                      void *ui_data);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_open(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *store_loader,
                                OSSL_STORE_open_fn store_open_function);
 typedef int (*OSSL_STORE_ctrl_fn)(OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *ctx, int cmd,
                                   va_list args);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_ctrl(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *store_loader,
                                OSSL_STORE_ctrl_fn store_ctrl_function);
 typedef int (*OSSL_STORE_expect_fn)(OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *ctx, int expected);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_expect(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *loader,
                                  OSSL_STORE_expect_fn expect_function);
 typedef int (*OSSL_STORE_find_fn)(OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *ctx,
                                   OSSL_STORE_SEARCH *criteria);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_find(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *loader,
                                OSSL_STORE_find_fn find_function);
 typedef OSSL_STORE_INFO *(*OSSL_STORE_load_fn)(OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *ctx,
                                                UI_METHOD *ui_method,
                                                void *ui_data);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_load(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *store_loader,
                                OSSL_STORE_load_fn store_load_function);
 typedef int (*OSSL_STORE_eof_fn)(OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *ctx);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_eof(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *store_loader,
                               OSSL_STORE_eof_fn store_eof_function);
 typedef int (*OSSL_STORE_error_fn)(OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *ctx);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_error(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *store_loader,
                                 OSSL_STORE_error_fn store_error_function);
 typedef int (*OSSL_STORE_close_fn)(OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX *ctx);
 int OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_close(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *store_loader,
                                 OSSL_STORE_close_fn store_close_function);
 void OSSL_STORE_LOADER_free(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *store_loader);

 int OSSL_STORE_register_loader(OSSL_STORE_LOADER *loader);
 OSSL_STORE_LOADER *OSSL_STORE_unregister_loader(const char *scheme);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These functions help applications and engines to create loaders for
schemes they support.

=head2 Types

B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER> is the type to hold a loader.
It contains a scheme and the functions needed to implement
OSSL_STORE_open(), OSSL_STORE_load(), OSSL_STORE_eof(), OSSL_STORE_error() and
OSSL_STORE_close() for this scheme.

B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> is a type template, to be defined by each loader
using B<struct ossl_store_loader_ctx_st { ... }>.

B<OSSL_STORE_open_fn>, B<OSSL_STORE_ctrl_fn>, B<OSSL_STORE_expect_fn>,
B<OSSL_STORE_find_fn>, B<OSSL_STORE_load_fn>, B<OSSL_STORE_eof_fn>,
and B<OSSL_STORE_close_fn>
are the function pointer types used within a STORE loader.
The functions pointed at define the functionality of the given loader.

=over 4

=item B<OSSL_STORE_open_fn>

This function takes a URI and is expected to interpret it in the best
manner possible according to the scheme the loader implements, it also
takes a B<UI_METHOD> and associated data, to be used any time
something needs to be prompted for.
Furthermore, this function is expected to initialize what needs to be
initialized, to create a privata data store (B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX>, see
above), and to return it.
If something goes wrong, this function is expected to return NULL.

=item B<OSSL_STORE_ctrl_fn>

This function takes a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer, a command number
B<cmd> and a B<va_list> B<args> and is used to manipulate loader
specific parameters.

=begin comment

Globally known command numbers are documented in L<OSSL_STORE_ctrl(3)>,
along with what B<args> are expected with each of them.

=end comment

Loader specific command numbers must begin at B<OSSL_STORE_C_CUSTOM_START>.
Any number below that is reserved for future globally known command
numbers.

This function is expected to return 1 on success, 0 on error.

=item B<OSSL_STORE_expect_fn>

This function takes a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer and a B<OSSL_STORE_INFO>
identity B<expected>, and is used to tell the loader what object type is
expected.
B<expected> may be zero to signify that no specific object type is expected.

This function is expected to return 1 on success, 0 on error.

=item B<OSSL_STORE_find_fn>

This function takes a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer and a
B<OSSL_STORE_SEARCH> search criterion, and is used to tell the loader what
to search for.

When called with the loader context being B<NULL>, this function is expected
to return 1 if the loader supports the criterion, otherwise 0.

When called with the loader context being something other than B<NULL>, this
function is expected to return 1 on success, 0 on error.

=item B<OSSL_STORE_load_fn>

This function takes a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer and a B<UI_METHOD>
with associated data.
It's expected to load the next available data, mold it into a data
structure that can be wrapped in a B<OSSL_STORE_INFO> using one of the
L<OSSL_STORE_INFO(3)> functions.
If no more data is available or an error occurs, this function is
expected to return NULL.
The B<OSSL_STORE_eof_fn> and B<OSSL_STORE_error_fn> functions must indicate if
it was in fact the end of data or if an error occurred.

Note that this function retrieves I<one> data item only.

=item B<OSSL_STORE_eof_fn>

This function takes a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer and is expected to
return 1 to indicate that the end of available data has been reached.
It is otherwise expected to return 0.

=item B<OSSL_STORE_error_fn>

This function takes a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer and is expected to
return 1 to indicate that an error occurred in a previous call to the
B<OSSL_STORE_load_fn> function.
It is otherwise expected to return 0.

=item B<OSSL_STORE_close_fn>

This function takes a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer and is expected to
close or shut down what needs to be closed, and finally free the
contents of the B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX> pointer.
It returns 1 on success and 0 on error.

=back

=head2 Functions

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_new() creates a new B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER>.
It takes an B<ENGINE> B<e> and a string B<scheme>.
B<scheme> must I<always> be set.
Both B<e> and B<scheme> are used as is and must therefore be alive as
long as the created loader is.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_get0_engine() returns the engine of the B<store_loader>.
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_get0_scheme() returns the scheme of the B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_open() sets the opener function for the
B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_ctrl() sets the control function for the
B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_expect() sets the expect function for the
B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_load() sets the loader function for the
B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_eof() sets the end of file checker function for the
B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_close() sets the closing function for the
B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_free() frees the given B<store_loader>.

OSSL_STORE_register_loader() register the given B<store_loader> and thereby
makes it available for use with OSSL_STORE_open(), OSSL_STORE_load(),
OSSL_STORE_eof() and OSSL_STORE_close().

OSSL_STORE_unregister_loader() unregister the store loader for the given
B<scheme>.

=head1 NOTES

The B<file:> scheme has built in support.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

The functions with the types B<OSSL_STORE_open_fn>, B<OSSL_STORE_ctrl_fn>,
B<OSSL_STORE_expect_fn>,
B<OSSL_STORE_load_fn>, B<OSSL_STORE_eof_fn> and B<OSSL_STORE_close_fn> have the
same return values as OSSL_STORE_open(), OSSL_STORE_ctrl(), OSSL_STORE_expect(),
OSSL_STORE_load(), OSSL_STORE_eof() and OSSL_STORE_close(), respectively.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_new() returns a pointer to a B<OSSL_STORE_LOADER> on success,
or B<NULL> on failure.

OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_open(), OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_ctrl(),
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_load(), OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_eof() and
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_close() return 1 on success, or 0 on failure.

OSSL_STORE_register_loader() returns 1 on success, or 0 on failure.

OSSL_STORE_unregister_loader() returns the unregistered loader on success,
or B<NULL> on failure.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ossl_store(7)>, L<OSSL_STORE_open(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

OSSL_STORE_LOADER(), OSSL_STORE_LOADER_CTX(), OSSL_STORE_LOADER_new(),
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set0_scheme(), OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_open(),
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_ctrl(), OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_load(),
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_eof(), OSSL_STORE_LOADER_set_close(),
OSSL_STORE_LOADER_free(), OSSL_STORE_register_loader(),
OSSL_STORE_unregister_loader(), OSSL_STORE_open_fn(), OSSL_STORE_ctrl_fn(),
OSSL_STORE_load_fn(), OSSL_STORE_eof_fn() and OSSL_STORE_close_fn()
were added in OpenSSL 1.1.1.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
