=pod

=head1 NAME

RAND_DRBG_new,
RAND_DRBG_secure_new,
RAND_DRBG_set,
RAND_DRBG_set_defaults,
RAND_DRBG_instantiate,
RAND_DRBG_uninstantiate,
RAND_DRBG_free
- initialize and cleanup a RAND_DRBG instance

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/rand_drbg.h>


 RAND_DRBG *RAND_DRBG_new(int type,
                          unsigned int flags,
                          RAND_DRBG *parent);

 RAND_DRBG *RAND_DRBG_secure_new(int type,
                                 unsigned int flags,
                                 RAND_DRBG *parent);

 int RAND_DRBG_set(RAND_DRBG *drbg,
                   int type, unsigned int flags);

 int RAND_DRBG_set_defaults(int type, unsigned int flags);

 int RAND_DRBG_instantiate(RAND_DRBG *drbg,
                           const unsigned char *pers, size_t perslen);

 int RAND_DRBG_uninstantiate(RAND_DRBG *drbg);

 void RAND_DRBG_free(RAND_DRBG *drbg);


=head1 DESCRIPTION

RAND_DRBG_new() and RAND_DRBG_secure_new()
create a new DRBG instance of the given B<type>, allocated from the heap resp.
the secure heap
(using OPENSSL_zalloc() resp. OPENSSL_secure_zalloc()).

RAND_DRBG_set() initializes the B<drbg> with the given B<type> and B<flags>.

RAND_DRBG_set_defaults() sets the default B<type> and B<flags> for new DRBG
instances.

Currently, all DRBG types are based on AES-CTR, so B<type> can be one of the
following values: NID_aes_128_ctr, NID_aes_192_ctr, NID_aes_256_ctr.
Before the DRBG can be used to generate random bits, it is necessary to set
its type and to instantiate it.

The optional B<flags> argument specifies a set of bit flags which can be
joined using the | operator. Currently, the only flag is
RAND_DRBG_FLAG_CTR_NO_DF, which disables the use of a the derivation function
ctr_df. For an explanation, see [NIST SP 800-90A Rev. 1].

If a B<parent> instance is specified then this will be used instead of
the default entropy source for reseeding the B<drbg>. It is said that the
B<drbg> is I<chained> to its B<parent>.
For more information, see the NOTES section.


RAND_DRBG_instantiate()
seeds the B<drbg> instance using random input from trusted entropy sources.
Optionally, a personalization string B<pers> of length B<perslen> can be
specified.
To omit the personalization string, set B<pers>=NULL and B<perslen>=0;

RAND_DRBG_uninstantiate()
clears the internal state of the B<drbg> and puts it back in the
uninstantiated state.

=head1 RETURN VALUES


RAND_DRBG_new() and RAND_DRBG_secure_new() return a pointer to a DRBG
instance allocated on the heap, resp. secure heap.

RAND_DRBG_set(),
RAND_DRBG_instantiate(), and
RAND_DRBG_uninstantiate()
return 1 on success, and 0 on failure.

RAND_DRBG_free() does not return a value.

=head1 NOTES

The DRBG design supports I<chaining>, which means that a DRBG instance can
use another B<parent> DRBG instance instead of the default entropy source
to obtain fresh random input for reseeding, provided that B<parent> DRBG
instance was properly instantiated, either from a trusted entropy source,
or from yet another parent DRBG instance.
For a detailed description of the reseeding process, see L<RAND_DRBG(7)>.

The default DRBG type and flags are applied only during creation of a DRBG
instance.
To ensure that they are applied to the global and thread-local DRBG instances
(<master>, resp. <public> and <private>), it is necessary to call
RAND_DRBG_set_defaults() before creating any thread and before calling any
cryptographic routines that obtain random data directly or indirectly.

=head1 HISTORY

The RAND_DRBG functions were added in OpenSSL 1.1.1.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<OPENSSL_zalloc(3)>,
L<OPENSSL_secure_zalloc(3)>,
L<RAND_DRBG_generate(3)>,
L<RAND_DRBG(7)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2017-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
