=pod

=head1 NAME

RIPEMD160, RIPEMD160_Init, RIPEMD160_Update, RIPEMD160_Final -
RIPEMD-160 hash function

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ripemd.h>

 unsigned char *RIPEMD160(const unsigned char *d, unsigned long n,
                          unsigned char *md);

 int RIPEMD160_Init(RIPEMD160_CTX *c);
 int RIPEMD160_Update(RIPEMD160_CTX *c, const void *data, unsigned long len);
 int RIPEMD160_Final(unsigned char *md, RIPEMD160_CTX *c);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

RIPEMD-160 is a cryptographic hash function with a
160 bit output.

RIPEMD160() computes the RIPEMD-160 message digest of the B<n>
bytes at B<d> and places it in B<md> (which must have space for
RIPEMD160_DIGEST_LENGTH == 20 bytes of output). If B<md> is NULL, the digest
is placed in a static array.

The following functions may be used if the message is not completely
stored in memory:

RIPEMD160_Init() initializes a B<RIPEMD160_CTX> structure.

RIPEMD160_Update() can be called repeatedly with chunks of the message to
be hashed (B<len> bytes at B<data>).

RIPEMD160_Final() places the message digest in B<md>, which must have
space for RIPEMD160_DIGEST_LENGTH == 20 bytes of output, and erases
the B<RIPEMD160_CTX>.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

RIPEMD160() returns a pointer to the hash value.

RIPEMD160_Init(), RIPEMD160_Update() and RIPEMD160_Final() return 1 for
success, 0 otherwise.

=head1 NOTE

Applications should use the higher level functions
L<EVP_DigestInit(3)> etc. instead of calling these
functions directly.

=head1 CONFORMING TO

ISO/IEC 10118-3:2016 Dedicated Hash-Function 1 (RIPEMD-160).

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<EVP_DigestInit(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2000-2019 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
