=pod

=head1 NAME

SCT_print, SCT_LIST_print, SCT_validation_status_string -
Prints Signed Certificate Timestamps in a human-readable way

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ct.h>

 void SCT_print(const SCT *sct, BIO *out, int indent, const CTLOG_STORE *logs);
 void SCT_LIST_print(const STACK_OF(SCT) *sct_list, BIO *out, int indent,
                     const char *separator, const CTLOG_STORE *logs);
 const char *SCT_validation_status_string(const SCT *sct);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SCT_print() prints a single Signed Certificate Timestamp (SCT) to a L<bio> in
a human-readable format. SCT_LIST_print() prints an entire list of SCTs in a
similar way. A separator can be specified to delimit each SCT in the output.

The output can be indented by a specified number of spaces. If a B<CTLOG_STORE>
is provided, it will be used to print the description of the CT log that issued
each SCT (if that log is in the CTLOG_STORE). Alternatively, NULL can be passed
as the CTLOG_STORE parameter to disable this feature.

SCT_validation_status_string() will return the validation status of an SCT as
a human-readable string. Call SCT_validate() or SCT_LIST_validate()
beforehand in order to set the validation status of an SCT first.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SCT_validation_status_string() returns a null-terminated string representing
the validation status of an B<SCT> object.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ct(7)>,
L<bio(7)>,
L<CTLOG_STORE_new(3)>,
L<SCT_validate(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

These functions were added in OpenSSL 1.1.0.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
