=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_CTX_set0_verify_cert_store, SSL_CTX_set1_verify_cert_store,
SSL_CTX_set0_chain_cert_store, SSL_CTX_set1_chain_cert_store,
SSL_set0_verify_cert_store, SSL_set1_verify_cert_store,
SSL_set0_chain_cert_store, SSL_set1_chain_cert_store - set certificate
verification or chain store

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 int SSL_CTX_set0_verify_cert_store(SSL_CTX *ctx, X509_STORE *st);
 int SSL_CTX_set1_verify_cert_store(SSL_CTX *ctx, X509_STORE *st);
 int SSL_CTX_set0_chain_cert_store(SSL_CTX *ctx, X509_STORE *st);
 int SSL_CTX_set1_chain_cert_store(SSL_CTX *ctx, X509_STORE *st);

 int SSL_set0_verify_cert_store(SSL *ctx, X509_STORE *st);
 int SSL_set1_verify_cert_store(SSL *ctx, X509_STORE *st);
 int SSL_set0_chain_cert_store(SSL *ctx, X509_STORE *st);
 int SSL_set1_chain_cert_store(SSL *ctx, X509_STORE *st);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_CTX_set0_verify_cert_store() and SSL_CTX_set1_verify_cert_store()
set the certificate store used for certificate verification to B<st>.

SSL_CTX_set0_chain_cert_store() and SSL_CTX_set1_chain_cert_store()
set the certificate store used for certificate chain building to B<st>.

SSL_set0_verify_cert_store(), SSL_set1_verify_cert_store(),
SSL_set0_chain_cert_store() and SSL_set1_chain_cert_store() are similar
except they apply to SSL structure B<ssl>.

All these functions are implemented as macros. Those containing a B<1>
increment the reference count of the supplied store so it must
be freed at some point after the operation. Those containing a B<0> do
not increment reference counts and the supplied store B<MUST NOT> be freed
after the operation.

=head1 NOTES

The stores pointers associated with an SSL_CTX structure are copied to any SSL
structures when SSL_new() is called. As a result SSL structures will not be
affected if the parent SSL_CTX store pointer is set to a new value.

The verification store is used to verify the certificate chain sent by the
peer: that is an SSL/TLS client will use the verification store to verify
the server's certificate chain and a SSL/TLS server will use it to verify
any client certificate chain.

The chain store is used to build the certificate chain.

If the mode B<SSL_MODE_NO_AUTO_CHAIN> is set or a certificate chain is
configured already (for example using the functions such as
L<SSL_CTX_add1_chain_cert(3)> or
L<SSL_CTX_add_extra_chain_cert(3)>) then
automatic chain building is disabled.

If the mode B<SSL_MODE_NO_AUTO_CHAIN> is set then automatic chain building
is disabled.

If the chain or the verification store is not set then the store associated
with the parent SSL_CTX is used instead to retain compatibility with previous
versions of OpenSSL.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

All these functions return 1 for success and 0 for failure.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<SSL_CTX_add_extra_chain_cert(3)>
L<SSL_CTX_set0_chain(3)>
L<SSL_CTX_set1_chain(3)>
L<SSL_CTX_add0_chain_cert(3)>
L<SSL_CTX_add1_chain_cert(3)>
L<SSL_set0_chain(3)>
L<SSL_set1_chain(3)>
L<SSL_add0_chain_cert(3)>
L<SSL_add1_chain_cert(3)>
L<SSL_CTX_build_cert_chain(3)>
L<SSL_build_cert_chain(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

These functions were added in OpenSSL 1.0.2.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2013-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
