=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_CONF_CTX_set_ssl_ctx, SSL_CONF_CTX_set_ssl - set context to configure

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 void SSL_CONF_CTX_set_ssl_ctx(SSL_CONF_CTX *cctx, SSL_CTX *ctx);
 void SSL_CONF_CTX_set_ssl(SSL_CONF_CTX *cctx, SSL *ssl);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_CONF_CTX_set_ssl_ctx() sets the context associated with B<cctx> to the
B<SSL_CTX> structure B<ctx>. Any previous B<SSL> or B<SSL_CTX> associated with
B<cctx> is cleared. Subsequent calls to SSL_CONF_cmd() will be sent to
B<ctx>.

SSL_CONF_CTX_set_ssl() sets the context associated with B<cctx> to the
B<SSL> structure B<ssl>. Any previous B<SSL> or B<SSL_CTX> associated with
B<cctx> is cleared. Subsequent calls to SSL_CONF_cmd() will be sent to
B<ssl>.

=head1 NOTES

The context need not be set or it can be set to B<NULL> in which case only
syntax checking of commands is performed, where possible.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_CONF_CTX_set_ssl_ctx() and SSL_CTX_set_ssl() do not return a value.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<SSL_CONF_CTX_new(3)>,
L<SSL_CONF_CTX_set_flags(3)>,
L<SSL_CONF_CTX_set1_prefix(3)>,
L<SSL_CONF_cmd(3)>,
L<SSL_CONF_cmd_argv(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

These functions were added in OpenSSL 1.0.2.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2012-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
