=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_SESSION_get0_ticket,
SSL_SESSION_has_ticket, SSL_SESSION_get_ticket_lifetime_hint
- get details about the ticket associated with a session

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 int SSL_SESSION_has_ticket(const SSL_SESSION *s);
 unsigned long SSL_SESSION_get_ticket_lifetime_hint(const SSL_SESSION *s);
 void SSL_SESSION_get0_ticket(const SSL_SESSION *s, const unsigned char **tick,
                              size_t *len);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_SESSION_has_ticket() returns 1 if there is a Session Ticket associated with
this session, and 0 otherwise.

SSL_SESSION_get_ticket_lifetime_hint returns the lifetime hint in seconds
associated with the session ticket.

SSL_SESSION_get0_ticket obtains a pointer to the ticket associated with a
session. The length of the ticket is written to B<*len>. If B<tick> is non
NULL then a pointer to the ticket is written to B<*tick>. The pointer is only
valid while the connection is in use. The session (and hence the ticket pointer)
may also become invalid as a result of a call to SSL_CTX_flush_sessions().

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_SESSION_has_ticket() returns 1 if session ticket exists or 0 otherwise.

SSL_SESSION_get_ticket_lifetime_hint() returns the number of seconds.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>,
L<d2i_SSL_SESSION(3)>,
L<SSL_SESSION_get_time(3)>,
L<SSL_SESSION_free(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

The SSL_SESSION_has_ticket(), SSL_SESSION_get_ticket_lifetime_hint()
and SSL_SESSION_get0_ticket() functions were added in OpenSSL 1.1.0.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2015-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
