=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_CTX_set_cert_store, SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store, SSL_CTX_get_cert_store - manipulate X509 certificate verification storage

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 void SSL_CTX_set_cert_store(SSL_CTX *ctx, X509_STORE *store);
 void SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store(SSL_CTX *ctx, X509_STORE *store);
 X509_STORE *SSL_CTX_get_cert_store(const SSL_CTX *ctx);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_CTX_set_cert_store() sets/replaces the certificate verification storage
of B<ctx> to/with B<store>. If another X509_STORE object is currently
set in B<ctx>, it will be X509_STORE_free()ed.

SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store() sets/replaces the certificate verification storage
of B<ctx> to/with B<store>. The B<store>'s reference count is incremented.
If another X509_STORE object is currently set in B<ctx>, it will be X509_STORE_free()ed.

SSL_CTX_get_cert_store() returns a pointer to the current certificate
verification storage.

=head1 NOTES

In order to verify the certificates presented by the peer, trusted CA
certificates must be accessed. These CA certificates are made available
via lookup methods, handled inside the X509_STORE. From the X509_STORE
the X509_STORE_CTX used when verifying certificates is created.

Typically the trusted certificate store is handled indirectly via using
L<SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations(3)>.
Using the SSL_CTX_set_cert_store() and SSL_CTX_get_cert_store() functions
it is possible to manipulate the X509_STORE object beyond the
L<SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations(3)>
call.

Currently no detailed documentation on how to use the X509_STORE
object is available. Not all members of the X509_STORE are used when
the verification takes place. So will e.g. the verify_callback() be
overridden with the verify_callback() set via the
L<SSL_CTX_set_verify(3)> family of functions.
This document must therefore be updated when documentation about the
X509_STORE object and its handling becomes available.

SSL_CTX_set_cert_store() does not increment the B<store>'s reference
count, so it should not be used to assign an X509_STORE that is owned
by another SSL_CTX.

To share X509_STOREs between two SSL_CTXs, use SSL_CTX_get_cert_store()
to get the X509_STORE from the first SSL_CTX, and then use
SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store() to assign to the second SSL_CTX and
increment the reference count of the X509_STORE.

=head1 RESTRICTIONS

The X509_STORE structure used by an SSL_CTX is used for verifying peer
certificates and building certificate chains, it is also shared by
every child SSL structure. Applications wanting finer control can use
functions such as SSL_CTX_set1_verify_cert_store() instead.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_CTX_set_cert_store() does not return diagnostic output.

SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store() does not return diagnostic output.

SSL_CTX_get_cert_store() returns the current setting.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>,
L<SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations(3)>,
L<SSL_CTX_set_verify(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2001-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
