=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher,
SSL_SESSION_set_cipher
- set and retrieve the SSL cipher associated with a session

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 const SSL_CIPHER *SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher(const SSL_SESSION *s);
 int SSL_SESSION_set_cipher(SSL_SESSION *s, const SSL_CIPHER *cipher);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher() retrieves the cipher that was used by the
connection when the session was created, or NULL if it cannot be determined.

The value returned is a pointer to an object maintained within B<s> and
should not be released.

SSL_SESSION_set_cipher() can be used to set the ciphersuite associated with the
SSL_SESSION B<s> to B<cipher>. For example, this could be used to set up a
session based PSK (see L<SSL_CTX_set_psk_use_session_callback(3)>).

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher() returns the SSL_CIPHER associated with the SSL_SESSION
or NULL if it cannot be determined.

SSL_SESSION_set_cipher() returns 1 on success or 0 on failure.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>,
L<d2i_SSL_SESSION(3)>,
L<SSL_SESSION_get_time(3)>,
L<SSL_SESSION_get0_hostname(3)>,
L<SSL_SESSION_free(3)>,
L<SSL_CTX_set_psk_use_session_callback(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

The SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher() function was added in OpenSSL 1.1.0.
The SSL_SESSION_set_cipher() function was added in OpenSSL 1.1.1.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2017 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
