=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown, SSL_CTX_get_quiet_shutdown, SSL_set_quiet_shutdown, SSL_get_quiet_shutdown - manipulate shutdown behaviour

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 void SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown(SSL_CTX *ctx, int mode);
 int SSL_CTX_get_quiet_shutdown(const SSL_CTX *ctx);

 void SSL_set_quiet_shutdown(SSL *ssl, int mode);
 int SSL_get_quiet_shutdown(const SSL *ssl);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown() sets the "quiet shutdown" flag for B<ctx> to be
B<mode>. SSL objects created from B<ctx> inherit the B<mode> valid at the time
L<SSL_new(3)> is called. B<mode> may be 0 or 1.

SSL_CTX_get_quiet_shutdown() returns the "quiet shutdown" setting of B<ctx>.

SSL_set_quiet_shutdown() sets the "quiet shutdown" flag for B<ssl> to be
B<mode>. The setting stays valid until B<ssl> is removed with
L<SSL_free(3)> or SSL_set_quiet_shutdown() is called again.
It is not changed when L<SSL_clear(3)> is called.
B<mode> may be 0 or 1.

SSL_get_quiet_shutdown() returns the "quiet shutdown" setting of B<ssl>.

=head1 NOTES

Normally when a SSL connection is finished, the parties must send out
close_notify alert messages using L<SSL_shutdown(3)>
for a clean shutdown.

When setting the "quiet shutdown" flag to 1, L<SSL_shutdown(3)>
will set the internal flags to SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN|SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN.
(L<SSL_shutdown(3)> then behaves like
L<SSL_set_shutdown(3)> called with
SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN|SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN.)
The session is thus considered to be shutdown, but no close_notify alert
is sent to the peer. This behaviour violates the TLS standard.

The default is normal shutdown behaviour as described by the TLS standard.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown() and SSL_set_quiet_shutdown() do not return
diagnostic information.

SSL_CTX_get_quiet_shutdown() and SSL_get_quiet_shutdown return the current
setting.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>, L<SSL_shutdown(3)>,
L<SSL_set_shutdown(3)>, L<SSL_new(3)>,
L<SSL_clear(3)>, L<SSL_free(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2001-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
