=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_free - free an allocated SSL structure

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 void SSL_free(SSL *ssl);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_free() decrements the reference count of B<ssl>, and removes the SSL
structure pointed to by B<ssl> and frees up the allocated memory if the
reference count has reached 0.
If B<ssl> is NULL nothing is done.

=head1 NOTES

SSL_free() also calls the free()ing procedures for indirectly affected items, if
applicable: the buffering BIO, the read and write BIOs,
cipher lists specially created for this B<ssl>, the B<SSL_SESSION>.
Do not explicitly free these indirectly freed up items before or after
calling SSL_free(), as trying to free things twice may lead to program
failure.

The ssl session has reference counts from two users: the SSL object, for
which the reference count is removed by SSL_free() and the internal
session cache. If the session is considered bad, because
L<SSL_shutdown(3)> was not called for the connection
and L<SSL_set_shutdown(3)> was not used to set the
SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN state, the session will also be removed
from the session cache as required by RFC2246.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_free() does not provide diagnostic information.

L<SSL_new(3)>, L<SSL_clear(3)>,
L<SSL_shutdown(3)>, L<SSL_set_shutdown(3)>,
L<ssl(7)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2000-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
