=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_get_peer_tmp_key, SSL_get_server_tmp_key, SSL_get_tmp_key - get information
about temporary keys used during a handshake

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 long SSL_get_peer_tmp_key(SSL *ssl, EVP_PKEY **key);
 long SSL_get_server_tmp_key(SSL *ssl, EVP_PKEY **key);
 long SSL_get_tmp_key(SSL *ssl, EVP_PKEY **key);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_get_peer_tmp_key() returns the temporary key provided by the peer and
used during key exchange. For example, if ECDHE is in use, then this represents
the peer's public ECDHE key. On success a pointer to the key is stored in
B<*key>. It is the caller's responsibility to free this key after use using
L<EVP_PKEY_free(3)>.

SSL_get_server_tmp_key() is a backwards compatibility alias for
SSL_get_peer_tmp_key().
Under that name it worked just on the client side of the connection, its
behaviour on the server end is release-dependent.

SSL_get_tmp_key() returns the equivalent information for the local
end of the connection.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

All these functions return 1 on success and 0 otherwise.

=head1 NOTES

This function is implemented as a macro.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>, L<EVP_PKEY_free(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2017-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
