=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_CTX_set_default_ctlog_list_file, SSL_CTX_set_ctlog_list_file -
load a Certificate Transparency log list from a file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 int SSL_CTX_set_default_ctlog_list_file(SSL_CTX *ctx);
 int SSL_CTX_set_ctlog_list_file(SSL_CTX *ctx, const char *path);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_CTX_set_default_ctlog_list_file() loads a list of Certificate Transparency
(CT) logs from the default file location, "ct_log_list.cnf", found in the
directory where OpenSSL is installed.

SSL_CTX_set_ctlog_list_file() loads a list of CT logs from a specific path.
See L<CTLOG_STORE_new(3)> for the file format.

=head1 NOTES

These functions will not clear the existing CT log list - it will be appended
to. To replace the existing list, use L<SSL_CTX_set0_ctlog_store> first.

If an error occurs whilst parsing a particular log entry in the file, that log
entry will be skipped.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_CTX_set_default_ctlog_list_file() and SSL_CTX_set_ctlog_list_file()
return 1 if the log list is successfully loaded, and 0 if an error occurs. In
the case of an error, the log list may have been partially loaded.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>,
L<SSL_CTX_set_ct_validation_callback(3)>,
L<CTLOG_STORE_new(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2019 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
