=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_CTX_set_alpn_protos, SSL_set_alpn_protos, SSL_CTX_set_alpn_select_cb,
SSL_CTX_set_next_proto_select_cb, SSL_CTX_set_next_protos_advertised_cb,
SSL_select_next_proto, SSL_get0_alpn_selected, SSL_get0_next_proto_negotiated
- handle application layer protocol negotiation (ALPN)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 int SSL_CTX_set_alpn_protos(SSL_CTX *ctx, const unsigned char *protos,
                             unsigned int protos_len);
 int SSL_set_alpn_protos(SSL *ssl, const unsigned char *protos,
                         unsigned int protos_len);
 void SSL_CTX_set_alpn_select_cb(SSL_CTX *ctx,
                                 int (*cb) (SSL *ssl,
                                            const unsigned char **out,
                                            unsigned char *outlen,
                                            const unsigned char *in,
                                            unsigned int inlen,
                                            void *arg), void *arg);
 void SSL_get0_alpn_selected(const SSL *ssl, const unsigned char **data,
                             unsigned int *len);

 void SSL_CTX_set_next_protos_advertised_cb(SSL_CTX *ctx,
                                            int (*cb)(SSL *ssl,
                                                      const unsigned char **out,
                                                      unsigned int *outlen,
                                                      void *arg),
                                            void *arg);
 void SSL_CTX_set_next_proto_select_cb(SSL_CTX *ctx,
                               int (*cb)(SSL *s,
                                         unsigned char **out,
                                         unsigned char *outlen,
                                         const unsigned char *in,
                                         unsigned int inlen,
                                         void *arg),
                               void *arg);
 int SSL_select_next_proto(unsigned char **out, unsigned char *outlen,
                           const unsigned char *server,
                           unsigned int server_len,
                           const unsigned char *client,
                           unsigned int client_len)
 void SSL_get0_next_proto_negotiated(const SSL *s, const unsigned char **data,
                             unsigned *len);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_CTX_set_alpn_protos() and SSL_set_alpn_protos() are used by the client to
set the list of protocols available to be negotiated. The B<protos> must be in
protocol-list format, described below. The length of B<protos> is specified in
B<protos_len>.

SSL_CTX_set_alpn_select_cb() sets the application callback B<cb> used by a
server to select which protocol to use for the incoming connection. When B<cb>
is NULL, ALPN is not used. The B<arg> value is a pointer which is passed to
the application callback.

B<cb> is the application defined callback. The B<in>, B<inlen> parameters are a
vector in protocol-list format. The value of the B<out>, B<outlen> vector
should be set to the value of a single protocol selected from the B<in>,
B<inlen> vector. The B<out> buffer may point directly into B<in>, or to a
buffer that outlives the handshake. The B<arg> parameter is the pointer set via
SSL_CTX_set_alpn_select_cb().

SSL_select_next_proto() is a helper function used to select protocols. It
implements the standard protocol selection. It is expected that this function
is called from the application callback B<cb>. The protocol data in B<server>,
B<server_len> and B<client>, B<client_len> must be in the protocol-list format
described below. The first item in the B<server>, B<server_len> list that
matches an item in the B<client>, B<client_len> list is selected, and returned
in B<out>, B<outlen>. The B<out> value will point into either B<server> or
B<client>, so it should be copied immediately. If no match is found, the first
item in B<client>, B<client_len> is returned in B<out>, B<outlen>. This
function can also be used in the NPN callback.

SSL_CTX_set_next_proto_select_cb() sets a callback B<cb> that is called when a
client needs to select a protocol from the server's provided list, and a
user-defined pointer argument B<arg> which will be passed to this callback.
For the callback itself, B<out>
must be set to point to the selected protocol (which may be within B<in>).
The length of the protocol name must be written into B<outlen>. The
server's advertised protocols are provided in B<in> and B<inlen>. The
callback can assume that B<in> is syntactically valid. The client must
select a protocol. It is fatal to the connection if this callback returns
a value other than B<SSL_TLSEXT_ERR_OK>. The B<arg> parameter is the pointer
set via SSL_CTX_set_next_proto_select_cb().

SSL_CTX_set_next_protos_advertised_cb() sets a callback B<cb> that is called
when a TLS server needs a list of supported protocols for Next Protocol
Negotiation. The returned list must be in protocol-list format, described
below.  The list is
returned by setting B<out> to point to it and B<outlen> to its length. This
memory will not be modified, but the B<SSL> does keep a
reference to it. The callback should return B<SSL_TLSEXT_ERR_OK> if it
wishes to advertise. Otherwise, no such extension will be included in the
ServerHello.

SSL_get0_alpn_selected() returns a pointer to the selected protocol in B<data>
with length B<len>. It is not NUL-terminated. B<data> is set to NULL and B<len>
is set to 0 if no protocol has been selected. B<data> must not be freed.

SSL_get0_next_proto_negotiated() sets B<data> and B<len> to point to the
client's requested protocol for this connection. If the client did not
request any protocol or NPN is not enabled, then B<data> is set to NULL and
B<len> to 0. Note that
the client can request any protocol it chooses. The value returned from
this function need not be a member of the list of supported protocols
provided by the callback.

=head1 NOTES

The protocol-lists must be in wire-format, which is defined as a vector of
non-empty, 8-bit length-prefixed, byte strings. The length-prefix byte is not
included in the length. Each string is limited to 255 bytes. A byte-string
length of 0 is invalid. A truncated byte-string is invalid. The length of the
vector is not in the vector itself, but in a separate variable.

Example:

 unsigned char vector[] = {
     6, 's', 'p', 'd', 'y', '/', '1',
     8, 'h', 't', 't', 'p', '/', '1', '.', '1'
 };
 unsigned int length = sizeof(vector);

The ALPN callback is executed after the servername callback; as that servername
callback may update the SSL_CTX, and subsequently, the ALPN callback.

If there is no ALPN proposed in the ClientHello, the ALPN callback is not
invoked.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_CTX_set_alpn_protos() and SSL_set_alpn_protos() return 0 on success, and
non-0 on failure. WARNING: these functions reverse the return value convention.

SSL_select_next_proto() returns one of the following:

=over 4

=item OPENSSL_NPN_NEGOTIATED

A match was found and is returned in B<out>, B<outlen>.

=item OPENSSL_NPN_NO_OVERLAP

No match was found. The first item in B<client>, B<client_len> is returned in
B<out>, B<outlen>.

=back

The ALPN select callback B<cb>, must return one of the following:

=over 4

=item SSL_TLSEXT_ERR_OK

ALPN protocol selected.

=item SSL_TLSEXT_ERR_ALERT_FATAL

There was no overlap between the client's supplied list and the server
configuration.

=item SSL_TLSEXT_ERR_NOACK

ALPN protocol not selected, e.g., because no ALPN protocols are configured for
this connection.

=back

The callback set using SSL_CTX_set_next_proto_select_cb() should return
B<SSL_TLSEXT_ERR_OK> if successful. Any other value is fatal to the connection.

The callback set using SSL_CTX_set_next_protos_advertised_cb() should return
B<SSL_TLSEXT_ERR_OK> if it wishes to advertise. Otherwise, no such extension
will be included in the ServerHello.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>, L<SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_servername_callback(3)>,
L<SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_servername_arg(3)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2017 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
