=pod

=head1 NAME

SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback, SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback,
SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func - logging TLS key material

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/ssl.h>

 typedef void (*SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func)(const SSL *ssl, const char *line);

 void SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback(SSL_CTX *ctx, SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func cb);
 SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback(const SSL_CTX *ctx);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback() sets the TLS key logging callback. This callback
is called whenever TLS key material is generated or received, in order to allow
applications to store this keying material for debugging purposes.

SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback() retrieves the previously set TLS key logging
callback. If no callback has been set, this will return NULL. When there is no
key logging callback, or if SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback is called with NULL as
the value of cb, no logging of key material will be done.

The key logging callback is called with two items: the B<ssl> object associated
with the connection, and B<line>, a string containing the key material in the
format used by NSS for its B<SSLKEYLOGFILE> debugging output. To recreate that
file, the key logging callback should log B<line>, followed by a newline.
B<line> will always be a NULL-terminated string.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback() returns a pointer to B<SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func> or
NULL if the callback is not set.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ssl(7)>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016-2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
