=pod

=head1 NAME

X509_STORE_CTX_get_cleanup,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_crls,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_certs,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_policy,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_cert_crl,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_crl,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_crl,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_revocation,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_issued,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_issuer,
X509_STORE_CTX_get_verify_cb,
X509_STORE_CTX_set_verify_cb,
X509_STORE_CTX_verify_cb
- get and set verification callback

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/x509_vfy.h>

 typedef int (*X509_STORE_CTX_verify_cb)(int, X509_STORE_CTX *);

 X509_STORE_CTX_verify_cb X509_STORE_CTX_get_verify_cb(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);

 void X509_STORE_CTX_set_verify_cb(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx,
                                   X509_STORE_CTX_verify_cb verify_cb);

 X509_STORE_CTX_get_issuer_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_issuer(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_check_issued_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_issued(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_check_revocation_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_revocation(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_get_crl_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_crl(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_check_crl_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_crl(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_cert_crl_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_cert_crl(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_check_policy_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_policy(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_lookup_certs_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_certs(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_lookup_crls_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_crls(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);
 X509_STORE_CTX_cleanup_fn X509_STORE_CTX_get_cleanup(X509_STORE_CTX *ctx);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

X509_STORE_CTX_set_verify_cb() sets the verification callback of B<ctx> to
B<verify_cb> overwriting any existing callback.

The verification callback can be used to customise the operation of certificate
verification, either by overriding error conditions or logging errors for
debugging purposes.

However a verification callback is B<not> essential and the default operation
is often sufficient.

The B<ok> parameter to the callback indicates the value the callback should
return to retain the default behaviour. If it is zero then an error condition
is indicated. If it is 1 then no error occurred. If the flag
B<X509_V_FLAG_NOTIFY_POLICY> is set then B<ok> is set to 2 to indicate the
policy checking is complete.

The B<ctx> parameter to the callback is the B<X509_STORE_CTX> structure that
is performing the verification operation. A callback can examine this
structure and receive additional information about the error, for example
by calling X509_STORE_CTX_get_current_cert(). Additional application data can
be passed to the callback via the B<ex_data> mechanism.

X509_STORE_CTX_get_verify_cb() returns the value of the current callback
for the specific B<ctx>.

X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_issuer(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_issued(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_revocation(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_crl(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_crl(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_cert_crl(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_policy(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_certs(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_crls()
and X509_STORE_CTX_get_cleanup() return the function pointers cached
from the corresponding B<X509_STORE>, please see
L<X509_STORE_set_verify(3)> for more information.


=head1 WARNING

In general a verification callback should B<NOT> unconditionally return 1 in
all circumstances because this will allow verification to succeed no matter
what the error. This effectively removes all security from the application
because B<any> certificate (including untrusted generated ones) will be
accepted.

=head1 NOTES

The verification callback can be set and inherited from the parent structure
performing the operation. In some cases (such as S/MIME verification) the
B<X509_STORE_CTX> structure is created and destroyed internally and the
only way to set a custom verification callback is by inheriting it from the
associated B<X509_STORE>.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

X509_STORE_CTX_set_verify_cb() does not return a value.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Default callback operation:

 int verify_callback(int ok, X509_STORE_CTX *ctx) {
     return ok;
 }

Simple example, suppose a certificate in the chain is expired and we wish
to continue after this error:

 int verify_callback(int ok, X509_STORE_CTX *ctx) {
     /* Tolerate certificate expiration */
     if (X509_STORE_CTX_get_error(ctx) == X509_V_ERR_CERT_HAS_EXPIRED)
         return 1;
     /* Otherwise don't override */
     return ok;
 }

More complex example, we don't wish to continue after B<any> certificate has
expired just one specific case:

 int verify_callback(int ok, X509_STORE_CTX *ctx)
 {
     int err = X509_STORE_CTX_get_error(ctx);
     X509 *err_cert = X509_STORE_CTX_get_current_cert(ctx);

     if (err == X509_V_ERR_CERT_HAS_EXPIRED) {
         if (check_is_acceptable_expired_cert(err_cert)
             return 1;
     }
     return ok;
 }

Full featured logging callback. In this case the B<bio_err> is assumed to be
a global logging B<BIO>, an alternative would to store a BIO in B<ctx> using
B<ex_data>.

 int verify_callback(int ok, X509_STORE_CTX *ctx)
 {
     X509 *err_cert;
     int err, depth;

     err_cert = X509_STORE_CTX_get_current_cert(ctx);
     err = X509_STORE_CTX_get_error(ctx);
     depth = X509_STORE_CTX_get_error_depth(ctx);

     BIO_printf(bio_err, "depth=%d ", depth);
     if (err_cert) {
         X509_NAME_print_ex(bio_err, X509_get_subject_name(err_cert),
                            0, XN_FLAG_ONELINE);
         BIO_puts(bio_err, "\n");
     }
     else
         BIO_puts(bio_err, "<no cert>\n");
     if (!ok)
         BIO_printf(bio_err, "verify error:num=%d:%s\n", err,
                    X509_verify_cert_error_string(err));
     switch (err) {
     case X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_GET_ISSUER_CERT:
         BIO_puts(bio_err, "issuer= ");
         X509_NAME_print_ex(bio_err, X509_get_issuer_name(err_cert),
                            0, XN_FLAG_ONELINE);
         BIO_puts(bio_err, "\n");
         break;
     case X509_V_ERR_CERT_NOT_YET_VALID:
     case X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CERT_NOT_BEFORE_FIELD:
         BIO_printf(bio_err, "notBefore=");
         ASN1_TIME_print(bio_err, X509_get_notBefore(err_cert));
         BIO_printf(bio_err, "\n");
         break;
     case X509_V_ERR_CERT_HAS_EXPIRED:
     case X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CERT_NOT_AFTER_FIELD:
         BIO_printf(bio_err, "notAfter=");
         ASN1_TIME_print(bio_err, X509_get_notAfter(err_cert));
         BIO_printf(bio_err, "\n");
         break;
     case X509_V_ERR_NO_EXPLICIT_POLICY:
         policies_print(bio_err, ctx);
         break;
     }
     if (err == X509_V_OK && ok == 2)
         /* print out policies */

     BIO_printf(bio_err, "verify return:%d\n", ok);
     return(ok);
 }

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<X509_STORE_CTX_get_error(3)>
L<X509_STORE_set_verify_cb_func(3)>
L<X509_STORE_CTX_get_ex_new_index(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

The
X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_issuer(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_issued(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_revocation(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_get_crl(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_crl(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_cert_crl(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_check_policy(),
X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_certs(), X509_STORE_CTX_get_lookup_crls()
and X509_STORE_CTX_get_cleanup() functions were added in OpenSSL 1.1.0.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2009-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
