=pod

=head1 NAME

X509_get_serialNumber,
X509_get0_serialNumber,
X509_set_serialNumber
- get or set certificate serial number

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/x509.h>

 ASN1_INTEGER *X509_get_serialNumber(X509 *x);
 const ASN1_INTEGER *X509_get0_serialNumber(const X509 *x);
 int X509_set_serialNumber(X509 *x, ASN1_INTEGER *serial);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

X509_get_serialNumber() returns the serial number of certificate B<x> as an
B<ASN1_INTEGER> structure which can be examined or initialised. The value
returned is an internal pointer which B<MUST NOT> be freed up after the call.

X509_get0_serialNumber() is the same as X509_get_serialNumber() except it
accepts a const parameter and returns a const result.

X509_set_serialNumber() sets the serial number of certificate B<x> to
B<serial>. A copy of the serial number is used internally so B<serial> should
be freed up after use.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

X509_get_serialNumber() and X509_get0_serialNumber() return an B<ASN1_INTEGER>
structure.

X509_set_serialNumber() returns 1 for success and 0 for failure.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<d2i_X509(3)>,
L<ERR_get_error(3)>,
L<X509_CRL_get0_by_serial(3)>,
L<X509_get0_signature(3)>,
L<X509_get_ext_d2i(3)>,
L<X509_get_extension_flags(3)>,
L<X509_get_pubkey(3)>,
L<X509_get_subject_name(3)>,
L<X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt(3)>,
L<X509_NAME_ENTRY_get_object(3)>,
L<X509_NAME_get_index_by_NID(3)>,
L<X509_NAME_print_ex(3)>,
L<X509_new(3)>,
L<X509_sign(3)>,
L<X509V3_get_d2i(3)>,
L<X509_verify_cert(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

The X509_get_serialNumber() and X509_set_serialNumber() functions are
available in all versions of OpenSSL.
The X509_get0_serialNumber() function was added in OpenSSL 1.1.0.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
