=pod

=head1 NAME

X509_LOOKUP_meth_new, X509_LOOKUP_meth_free, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_new_item,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_new_item, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_free,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_free, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_init,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_init, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_shutdown,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_shutdown,
X509_LOOKUP_ctrl_fn, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_ctrl, X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_ctrl,
X509_LOOKUP_get_by_subject_fn, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_subject,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_subject,
X509_LOOKUP_get_by_issuer_serial_fn, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_issuer_serial,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_issuer_serial,
X509_LOOKUP_get_by_fingerprint_fn, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_fingerprint,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_fingerprint,
X509_LOOKUP_get_by_alias_fn, X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_alias,
X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_alias,
X509_LOOKUP_set_method_data, X509_LOOKUP_get_method_data,
X509_LOOKUP_get_store, X509_OBJECT_set1_X509, X509_OBJECT_set1_X509_CRL
- Routines to build up X509_LOOKUP methods

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #include <openssl/x509_vfy.h>

 X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *X509_LOOKUP_meth_new(const char *name);
 void X509_LOOKUP_meth_free(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method);

 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_new_item(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
                                   int (*new_item) (X509_LOOKUP *ctx));
 int (*X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_new_item(const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD* method))
     (X509_LOOKUP *ctx);

 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_free(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
                               void (*free) (X509_LOOKUP *ctx));
 void (*X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_free(const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD* method))
     (X509_LOOKUP *ctx);

 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_init(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
                               int (*init) (X509_LOOKUP *ctx));
 int (*X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_init(const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD* method))
     (X509_LOOKUP *ctx);

 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_shutdown(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
                                   int (*shutdown) (X509_LOOKUP *ctx));
 int (*X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_shutdown(const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD* method))
     (X509_LOOKUP *ctx);

 typedef int (*X509_LOOKUP_ctrl_fn)(X509_LOOKUP *ctx, int cmd, const char *argc,
                                    long argl, char **ret);
 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_ctrl(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
     X509_LOOKUP_ctrl_fn ctrl_fn);
 X509_LOOKUP_ctrl_fn X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_ctrl(const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method);

 typedef int (*X509_LOOKUP_get_by_subject_fn)(X509_LOOKUP *ctx,
                                              X509_LOOKUP_TYPE type,
                                              X509_NAME *name,
                                              X509_OBJECT *ret);
 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_subject(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
     X509_LOOKUP_get_by_subject_fn fn);
 X509_LOOKUP_get_by_subject_fn X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_subject(
     const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method);

 typedef int (*X509_LOOKUP_get_by_issuer_serial_fn)(X509_LOOKUP *ctx,
                                                    X509_LOOKUP_TYPE type,
                                                    X509_NAME *name,
                                                    ASN1_INTEGER *serial,
                                                    X509_OBJECT *ret);
 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_issuer_serial(
     X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method, X509_LOOKUP_get_by_issuer_serial_fn fn);
 X509_LOOKUP_get_by_issuer_serial_fn X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_issuer_serial(
     const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method);

 typedef int (*X509_LOOKUP_get_by_fingerprint_fn)(X509_LOOKUP *ctx,
                                                  X509_LOOKUP_TYPE type,
                                                  const unsigned char* bytes,
                                                  int len,
                                                  X509_OBJECT *ret);
 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_fingerprint(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
     X509_LOOKUP_get_by_fingerprint_fn fn);
 X509_LOOKUP_get_by_fingerprint_fn X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_fingerprint(
     const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method);

 typedef int (*X509_LOOKUP_get_by_alias_fn)(X509_LOOKUP *ctx,
                                            X509_LOOKUP_TYPE type,
                                            const char *str,
                                            int len,
                                            X509_OBJECT *ret);
 int X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_get_by_alias(X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method,
     X509_LOOKUP_get_by_alias_fn fn);
 X509_LOOKUP_get_by_alias_fn X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_get_by_alias(
     const X509_LOOKUP_METHOD *method);

 int X509_LOOKUP_set_method_data(X509_LOOKUP *ctx, void *data);
 void *X509_LOOKUP_get_method_data(const X509_LOOKUP *ctx);

 X509_STORE *X509_LOOKUP_get_store(const X509_LOOKUP *ctx);

 int X509_OBJECT_set1_X509(X509_OBJECT *a, X509 *obj);
 int X509_OBJECT_set1_X509_CRL(X509_OBJECT *a, X509_CRL *obj);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<X509_LOOKUP_METHOD> type is a structure used for the implementation of new
X509_LOOKUP types. It provides a set of functions used by OpenSSL for the
implementation of various X509 and X509_CRL lookup capabilities. One instance
of an X509_LOOKUP_METHOD can be associated to many instantiations of an
B<X509_LOOKUP> structure.

X509_LOOKUP_meth_new() creates a new B<X509_LOOKUP_METHOD> structure. It should
be given a human-readable string containing a brief description of the lookup
method.

X509_LOOKUP_meth_free() destroys a B<X509_LOOKUP_METHOD> structure.

X509_LOOKUP_get_new_item() and X509_LOOKUP_set_new_item() get and set the
function that is called when an B<X509_LOOKUP> object is created with
X509_LOOKUP_new(). If an X509_LOOKUP_METHOD requires any per-X509_LOOKUP
specific data, the supplied new_item function should allocate this data and
invoke X509_LOOKUP_set_method_data().

X509_LOOKUP_get_free() and X509_LOOKUP_set_free() get and set the function
that is used to free any method data that was allocated and set from within
new_item function.

X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_init() and X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_init() get and set the
function that is used to initialize the method data that was set with
X509_LOOKUP_set_method_data() as part of the new_item routine.

X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_shutdown() and X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_shutdown() get and set
the function that is used to shut down the method data whose state was
previously initialized in the init function.

X509_LOOKUP_meth_get_ctrl() and X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_ctrl() get and set a
function to be used to handle arbitrary control commands issued by
X509_LOOKUP_ctrl(). The control function is given the X509_LOOKUP
B<ctx>, along with the arguments passed by X509_LOOKUP_ctrl. B<cmd> is
an arbitrary integer that defines some operation. B<argc> is a pointer
to an array of characters. B<argl> is an integer. B<ret>, if set,
points to a location where any return data should be written to. How
B<argc> and B<argl> are used depends entirely on the control function.


X509_LOOKUP_set_get_by_subject(), X509_LOOKUP_set_get_by_issuer_serial(),
X509_LOOKUP_set_get_by_fingerprint(), X509_LOOKUP_set_get_by_alias() set
the functions used to retrieve an X509 or X509_CRL object by the object's
subject, issuer, fingerprint, and alias respectively. These functions are given
the X509_LOOKUP context, the type of the X509_OBJECT being requested, parameters
related to the lookup, and an X509_OBJECT that will receive the requested
object.

Implementations should use either X509_OBJECT_set1_X509() or
X509_OBJECT_set1_X509_CRL() to set the result. Any method data that was
created as a result of the new_item function set by
X509_LOOKUP_meth_set_new_item() can be accessed with
X509_LOOKUP_get_method_data(). The B<X509_STORE> object that owns the
X509_LOOKUP may be accessed with X509_LOOKUP_get_store(). Successful lookups
should return 1, and unsuccessful lookups should return 0.

X509_LOOKUP_get_get_by_subject(), X509_LOOKUP_get_get_by_issuer_serial(),
X509_LOOKUP_get_get_by_fingerprint(), X509_LOOKUP_get_get_by_alias() retrieve
the function set by the corresponding setter.

=head1 RETURN VALUES

The B<X509_LOOKUP_meth_set> functions return 1 on success or 0 on error.

The B<X509_LOOKUP_meth_get> functions return the corresponding function
pointers.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<X509_STORE_new(3)>, L<SSL_CTX_set_cert_store(3)>

=head1 HISTORY

The functions described here were added in OpenSSL 1.1.0i.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2018 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
