.\" Copyright (c) 2016 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by Andrew Turner under
.\" sponsorship from the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 20, 2016
.Dt ARMV8CRYPTO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm armv8crypto
.Nd "driver for the AES accelerator on ARM CPUs"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device crypto"
.Cd "device armv8crypto"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
armv8crypto_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Starting with the ARMv8 architecture ARM Limited has added optional
cryptography instructions to accelerate AES, SHA-1, SHA-2, and
finite field arithmetic.
.Pp
The processor capability is reported as AES in the Instruction Set
Attributes 0 line at boot.
The
.Nm
driver does not attach on systems that lack the required CPU capability.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver registers itself to accelerate AES operations for
.Xr crypto 4 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypt 3 ,
.Xr crypto 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr random 4 ,
.Xr crypto 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Andrew Turner Aq Mt andrew@FreeBSD.org .
