.\" $OpenBSD: cpu.4,v 1.1 2022/07/11 03:11:49 daniel Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Michael Shalayeff
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR HIS RELATIVES BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF MIND, USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 11 2022 $
.Dt CPU 4 hppa
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cpu
.Nd HP PA-RISC CPU
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "cpu*       at mainbus0 irq 31"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The following table lists the
.Tn PA-RISC
CPU types and their characteristics, such as TLB, maximum
cache sizes (where the
.Sq *
character means on-chip) and
.Tn HP 9000/700
machines they were used in (see also
.Xr intro 4
for the reverse list).
.Bl -column "7100LC" "1.1e" "MHz max" "2048 L1D*" "TLB" "BAT" "C3650, C3700, C3750"
.It Sy CPU Ta Sy PA Ta Sy Clock Ta Sy Caches Ta Sy TLB Ta Sy BAT Ta Sy Models
.It Ta Ta MHz max Ta KB max Ta Ta Ta ""
.It 7000 Ta 1.1a Ta 66 Ta 256 L1I Ta 96I Ta 4I Ta 705, 710, 720
.It Ta Ta Ta 256 L1D Ta 96D Ta 4D Ta 730, 750
.It 7100 Ta 1.1b Ta 100 Ta 1024 L1I Ta 120 Ta 16 Ta 715/33/50/75
.It Ta Ta Ta 2048 L1D Ta Ta Ta 725/50/75
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta {735,755}/100
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta 742i, 745i, 747i
.It 7150 Ta 1.1b Ta 125 Ta 1024 L1I Ta 120 Ta 16 Ta 735/125, 755/125
.It Ta Ta Ta 2048 L1D Ta Ta Ta ""
.It 7100LC Ta 1.1c Ta 100 Ta 1 L1I* Ta 64 Ta 8 Ta 712/60/80/100
.It Ta Ta Ta 1024 L2I Ta Ta Ta 715/64/80/100
.It Ta Ta Ta 1024 L2D Ta Ta Ta 715/100XC
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta 725/64/100
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta 743i, 748i
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta SAIC
.It 7200 Ta 1.1d Ta 140 Ta 2 L1* Ta 120 Ta 16 Ta C100, C110
.It Ta Ta Ta 1024 L2I Ta Ta Ta J200, J210
.It Ta Ta Ta 1024 L2D Ta Ta Ta ""
.It 7300LC Ta 1.1e Ta 180 Ta 64 L1I* Ta 96 Ta 8 Ta A180, A180C
.It Ta Ta Ta 64 L1D* Ta Ta Ta B132, B160, B180
.It Ta Ta Ta 8192 L2 Ta Ta Ta C132L, C160L
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta 744, 745, 748
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta RDI PrecisionBook
.It 8000 Ta 2.0 Ta 180 Ta 1024 L1I Ta 96 Ta Ta C160, C180
.It Ta Ta Ta 1024 L1D Ta Ta Ta J280, J282
.It 8200 Ta 2.0 Ta 300 Ta 2048 L1I Ta 120 Ta Ta C200, C240
.It Ta Ta Ta 2048 L1D Ta Ta Ta J2240
.It 8500 Ta 2.0 Ta 440 Ta 512 L1I* Ta 160 Ta Ta A400, A500, C360
.It Ta Ta Ta 1024 L1D* Ta Ta Ta B1000, B2000, C3000
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta J5000, J7000
.It 8600 Ta 2.0 Ta 550 Ta 512 L1I* Ta 160 Ta Ta A400, A500, C3600
.It Ta Ta Ta 1024 L1D* Ta Ta Ta B2000, B2600
.It Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta Ta J5600, J6000, J7600
.It 8700 Ta 2.0 Ta 875 Ta 768 L1I* Ta 240 Ta Ta A400, A500, J6700
.It Ta Ta Ta 1536 L1D* Ta Ta Ta C3650, C3700, C3750
.El
.Sh FLOATING-POINT COPROCESSOR
The following table summarizes available floating-point coprocessor
models for the 32-bit
.Tn PA-RISC
processors.
.Bl -column "Sterling I MIU (ROC w/Weitek)" "712/60/80/100"
.It Sy FPU Ta Sy Model
.It Indigo Ta ""
.It Sterling I MIU (TYCO) Ta ""
.It Sterling I MIU (ROC w/Weitek) Ta ""
.It FPC (w/Weitek) Ta ""
.It FPC (w/Bit) Ta ""
.It Timex-II Ta ""
.It Rolex Ta 725/50, 745i
.It HARP-I Ta ""
.It Tornado Ta J2x0,C1x0
.It PA-50 (Hitachi) Ta ""
.It PCXL Ta 712/60/80/100
.El
.Sh SUPERSCALAR EXECUTION
The following table summarizes the superscalar execution capabilities
of 32-bit
.Tn PA-RISC
processors.
.Bl -column "7100LC" "2 integer ALU" "4-way superscalar"
.It Sy CPU Ta Sy Units Ta Sy Bundles
.It 7100 Ta 1 integer ALU Ta load-store/fp
.It Ta 1 FP Ta int/fp
.It Ta Ta branch/*
.It 7100LC Ta 2 integer ALU Ta load-store/int
.It Ta 1 FP Ta load-store/fp
.It Ta Ta int/fp
.It Ta Ta branch/*
.It 7200 Ta 2 integer ALU Ta load-store/int
.It Ta 1 FP Ta load-store/fp
.It Ta Ta int/int
.It Ta Ta int/fp
.It Ta Ta branch/*
.It 7300LC Ta 2 integer ALU Ta load-store/int
.It Ta 1 FP Ta load-store/fp
.It Ta Ta int/fp
.It Ta Ta branch/*
.It 8x00 Ta 2 integer ALU Ta 4-way superscalar
.It Ta 2 shift/merge Ta ""
.It Ta 2 load/store Ta ""
.It Ta 2 FPU mul/add Ta ""
.It Ta 2 FPU div/sqrt Ta ""
.El
.Pp
In conclusion, all of the above CPUs are dual-issue, or 2-way superscalar,
with the exception that on CPUs with two integer ALUs only one of these
units is capable of doing shift, load/store and test operations.
Additionally, there are several kinds of restrictions placed upon the
superscalar execution:
.Pp
For the purpose of showing which instructions are allowed to proceed
together through the pipeline, they are divided into classes:
.Bl -column "fsys" "FTEST and FP status/exception"
.It Sy Class Ta Sy Description
.It flop Ta floating point operation
.It ldst Ta loads and stores
.It flex Ta integer ALU
.It mm Ta shifts, extracts and deposits
.It nul Ta might nullify successor
.It bv Ta BV, BE
.It br Ta other branches
.It fsys Ta FTEST and FP status/exception
.It sys Ta system control instructions
.El
.Pp
For CPUs with two integer ALUs (7100LC, 7200, 7300LC), the following
table lists the instructions which are allowed to be executed
concurrently:
.Bl -column "flex" "flop/ldst/flex/mm/nul/br/fsys"
.It Sy First Ta Sy Second instruction
.It flop Ta + ldst/flex/mm/nul/bv/br
.It ldst Ta + flop/flex/mm/nul/br
.It flex Ta + flop/ldst/flex/mm/nul/br/fsys
.It mm Ta + flop/ldst/flex/fsys
.It nul Ta + flop
.It sys Ta never bundled
.El
.Pp
ldst + ldst is also possible under certain circumstances, which is then
called "double word load/store".
.Pp
The following restrictions are placed upon the superscalar execution:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
An instruction that modifies a register will not be bundled with another
instruction that takes this register as operand.
Exception: a flop can be bundled with an FP store of the flop's result register.
.It
An FP load to one word of a doubleword register will not be bundled with
a flop that uses the other doubleword of this register.
.It
A flop will not be bundled with an FP load if both instructions have the
same target register.
.It
An instruction that could set the carry/borrow bits will not be bundled
with an instruction that uses
carry/borrow bits.
.It
An instruction which is in the delay slot of a branch is never bundled
with other instructions.
.It
An instruction which is at an odd word address and executed as a target
of a taken branch is never bundled.
.It
An instruction which might nullify its successor is never bundled with
this successor.
Only if the successor is a flop instruction is this bundle allowed.
.El
.Sh PERFORMANCE MONITOR COPROCESSOR
The performance monitor coprocessor is an optional,
implementation-dependent coprocessor which provides a minimal common
software interface to implementation-dependent performance monitor hardware.
.Sh DEBUG SPECIAL UNIT
The debug special function unit is an optional,
architected SFU which provides hardware assistance for software debugging
using breakpoints.
The debug SFU is currently defined only for Level 0 processors.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr asp 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr lasi 4 ,
.Xr mem 4 ,
.Xr pdc 4 ,
.Xr wax 4
.Rs
.%T PA-RISC 1.1 Architecture and Instruction Set Reference Manual
.%A Hewlett-Packard
.%D May 15, 1996
.Re
.Rs
.%T PA7100LC ERS
.%A Hewlett-Packard
.%D March 30 1999
.%N Public version 1.0
.Re
.Rs
.%T Design of the PA7200 CPU
.%A Hewlett-Packard Journal
.%D February 1996
.Re
.Rs
.%T PA7300LC ERS
.%A Hewlett-Packard
.%D March 18 1996
.%N Version 1.0
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Michael Shalayeff Aq Mt mickey@openbsd.org
for the HPPA
port for
.Ox 2.5 .
