.\"	$OpenBSD: ie.4,v 1.16 2007/05/31 19:19:54 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Paul Weissmann
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 31 2007 $
.Dt IE 4 hppa
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ie
.Nd Intel i82596 Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ie0 at gsc? irq 8"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface provides access to the 10 Mb/s
.Tn Ethernet
network via the
.Tn Intel
i82596 DX/CA 32-bit
Local Area Network Coprocessor for Ethernet.
.Pp
The i82596 comes basically in two different flavors:
.Bl -tag -width i82596DXxxx
.It i82596DX
Systems with an ASP or WAX Main Bus Adapter (MBA), e.g. 720, 735 etc.
These types of systems generally have only AUI or BNC and AUI connectors at
the back.
On the models with both you usually have to switch a big
jumper-block on the mainboard to choose which one to activate.
.It i82596CA
Systems with LASI MBA, e.g. 712/*, 715/100 have the i82596CA
integrated on the LASI macrochip.
They usually have TP and AUI
connectors and autodetect to which one the network is connected to.
.El
.Pp
By default, the system will select the media type automatically, but the
.Xr ifconfig 8
command can be used to force the media selection.
The media types are shown below:
.Bl -tag -width "media autoselect" -offset indent
.It media autoselect
Attempt to autoselect the media type (default)
.It media 10base5
Use the AUI connector
.It media 10baseT
Use the twisted pair connector
.It media 10base2
Use the BNC connector
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr io 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T 82596DX AND 82596SX High-Performance 32-bit Local Area Network Coprocessor
.%Q Intel
.Re
.Rs
.%T 82596CA High-Performance 32-bit Local Area Network Coprocessor
.%Q Intel
.Re
