.\"-
.\"  Copyright (c) 2010 Gordon Tetlow
.\"  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\"  are met:
.\"  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\"  ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"  IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\"  ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"  FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"  DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\"  OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\"  HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\"  LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\"  OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\"  SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 3, 2011
.Dt MAN.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm man.conf
.Nd
.Xr man 1
and
.Xr manpath 1
configuration files
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file is used to configure the manual search path, locales, and utility set for
.Xr man 1
and its related utilities.
During initialization,
.Xr man 1
reads the configuration files located at
.Pa /usr/local/etc/man.d/*.conf
and
.Pa /etc/man.conf .
.Pp
The files contained in
.Pa /usr/local/etc/man.d/*.conf
are intended to be used by the
.Xr ports 7
system for extending the manual set to support additional paths and locales.
.Pa /etc/man.conf
is intended to be used by the local administrator to set additional policy.
.Pp
Currently supported configuration variables include:
.Bl -tag -width 12n -offset indent
.It MANCONFIG
Overrides the default location to import additional manual configuration files.
Defaults to
.Pa /usr/local/etc/man.d/*.conf .
.It MANPATH
Adds the specified directory to the manual search path.
.It MANLOCALE
Indicates support is available for the given locale.
.El
.Pp
For pages in a given language, overriding the default toolset for
display is supported via the following definitions:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 12n -offset indent -compact
.It EQN Ns _ Ns Va LANG
.It NROFF Ns _ Ns Va LANG
.It PIC Ns _ Ns Va LANG
.It TBL Ns _ Ns Va LANG
.It TROFF Ns _ Ns Va LANG
.It REFER Ns _ Ns Va LANG
.It VGRIND Ns _ Ns Va LANG
.El
.Pp
See the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section for how to use these variables.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The parser used for this utility is very basic and only supports comment
characters (#) at the beginning of a line.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "Pa /usr/local/etc/man.d/*.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/man.conf
System configuration file.
.It Pa /usr/local/etc/man.d/*.conf
Local configuration files.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
A perl port that needs to install additional manual pages outside of the
default location could install a file in
.Pa /usr/local/etc/man.d/perl.conf
with the following contents:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Add perl man pages to search path
MANPATH /usr/local/lib/perl5/5.8.9/man
MANPATH /usr/local/lib/perl5/5.8.9/perl/man
.Ed
.Pp
A Japanese localization port could install a custom toolset and include a
file in
.Pa /usr/local/etc/man.d/ja-man-doc.conf
with the following contents:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Setup Japanese toolset
MANLOCALE	ja_JP.eucJP
EQN_JA		/usr/local/bin/geqn
PIC_JA		/usr/local/bin/gpic
TBL_JA		/usr/local/bin/gtbl
NROFF_JA	/usr/local/bin/groff -man -dlang=ja_JP.eucJP
TROFF_JA	/usr/local/bin/groff -man -dlang=ja_JP.euc.jp
.Ed
.Pp
If the system administrator decides to override the
.Va LOCALBASE
.Xr make 1
variable causing all
.Xr ports 7
to be installed into
.Pa /opt
instead of
.Pa /usr/local ,
specifying the following in
.Pa /etc/man.conf
will accommodate this change:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Look for additional configuration files
MANCONFIG /opt/etc/man.d/*.conf
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr manpath 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1
