.\"	$OpenBSD: lcd.4,v 1.4 2015/02/15 22:26:45 bentley Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Kenji AOYAMA <aoyama@nk-home.net>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 15 2015 $
.Dt LCD 4 luna88k
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lcd
.Nd front panel LCD display
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "lcd0 at mainbus0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides access to the front panel LCD display on LUNA-88K.
It is accessed using
.Xr write 2
to print the characters on the LCD.
The device has a physical display area of 16 characters x 2 lines
and an internal line buffer of 40 characters x 2 lines.
.Pp
The following ioctl calls apply to the
.Nm
device:
.Bl -tag -width LCD
.It Dv LCDCLS
Clear the LCD screen, restore display area from shift and move the
cursor to upper-left position.
.It Dv LCDHOME
Restore display area from shift and move the cursor to upper-left
position.
.It Dv LCDMODE Fa "int *"
Specify cursor advance direction and display shift mode.
.It Dv LCDDISP Fa "int *"
Control display on/off, cursor on/off, and cursor blinking on/off.
.It Dv LCDMOVE Fa "int *"
Move the cursor or shift the display area.
.It Dv LCDSEEK Fa "int *"
Move the cursor to the specified position.
On the first line, the position is specified by a value between 0x00 and 0x27.
On the second line, the value is between 0x40 and 0x67.
.It Dv LCDRESTORE
Restore boot-time LCD message.
.El
.Pp
These ioctl parameters are defined in
.In machine/lcd.h .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/lcd
.It Pa /dev/lcd
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.1 .
