.\"	$OpenBSD: pcexmem.4,v 1.4 2014/12/08 13:24:04 aoyama Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Kenji Aoyama.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 8 2014 $
.Dt PCEXMEM 4 luna88k
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pcexmem ,
.Nm pcexio
.Nd NEC PC-9801 extension board slot
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pcex0 at cbus0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Pa /dev/pcexmem
is an
.Xr mmap 2
capable interface to the memory area of the installed board at "NEC PC-9801
extension board slot" on LUNA-88K2.
Byte offsets in this file are interpreted as relative memory addresses
of the installed board.
The range should be between 0x0 and 0xffffff.
.Pp
The I/O port area of the installed board is accessed via the file
.Pa /dev/pcexio
in the same manner as
.Pa /dev/pcexmem .
The range should be between 0x0 and 0xffff.
.Pp
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls apply to
.Pa /dev/pcexmem
and
.Pa /dev/pcexio
in order to handle interrupts of this extension slot.
Currently 7 levels of interrupt (0 to 6) are supported.
.Bl -tag -width PCEX
.It Dv PCEXSETLEVEL Fa "u_int *"
Register the specified interrupt level with this driver to handle.
.It Dv PCEXRESETLEVEL Fa "u_int *"
Unregister the specified interrupt level with this driver.
.It Dv PCEXWAITINT Fa "u_int *"
Wait for the interrupt with the specified level.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/pcexmem -compact
.It Pa /dev/pcexmem
.It Pa /dev/pcexio
.El
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EWOULDBLOCK
PCEXWAITINT timeouts (currently 1 second).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Pa /dev/pcexmem
and
.Pa /dev/pcexio
files first appeared in
.Ox 5.6 .
