.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Apple Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3.  Neither the name of Apple Inc. ("Apple") nor the names of
.\"     its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"     from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY APPLE AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL APPLE OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 24, 2004
.Dt AUDIT_EVENT 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm audit_event
.Nd "audit event descriptions"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains descriptions of the auditable events on the system.
Each line maps an audit event number to a name, a description, and a class.
Entries are of the form:
.Pp
.Sm off
.D1 Ar eventnum : eventname : description : eventclass
.Sm on
.Pp
Each
.Ar eventclass
should have a corresponding entry in the
.Xr audit_class 5
file.
.Pp
Example entries in this file are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
0:AUE_NULL:indir system call:no
1:AUE_EXIT:exit(2):pc
2:AUE_FORK:fork(2):pc
3:AUE_OPEN:open(2):fa
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/security/audit_event" -compact
.It Pa /etc/security/audit_event
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit 4 ,
.Xr audit_class 5 ,
.Xr audit_control 5 ,
.Xr audit_user 5
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.\& in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include
.An Wayne Salamon ,
.An Robert Watson ,
and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
