.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Tom Rhodes
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 19, 2005
.Dt AUDIT 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm audit
.Nd "commit BSM audit record to audit log"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In bsm/audit.h
.Ft int
.Fn audit "const char *record" "u_int length"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn audit
system call
submits a completed BSM audit record to the system audit log.
.Pp
The
.Fa record
argument
is a pointer to the specific event to be recorded and
.Fa length
is the size in bytes of the data to be written.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn audit
system call will fail and the data never written if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
The
.Fa record
argument is beyond the allocated address space of the process.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The token ID is invalid or
.Va length
is larger than
.Dv MAXAUDITDATA .
.It Bq Er EPERM
The process does not have sufficient permission to complete
the operation.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr auditon 2 ,
.Xr getaudit 2 ,
.Xr getaudit_addr 2 ,
.Xr getauid 2 ,
.Xr setaudit 2 ,
.Xr setaudit_addr 2 ,
.Xr setauid 2 ,
.Xr libbsm 3
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.\& in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include
.An Wayne Salamon ,
.An Robert Watson ,
and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Fx
kernel does not fully validate that the argument passed is syntactically
valid BSM.
Submitting invalid audit records may corrupt the audit log.
