.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Apple Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 19, 2008
.Dt GETAUDIT 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm getaudit ,
.Nm getaudit_addr
.Nd "retrieve audit session state"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In bsm/audit.h
.Ft int
.Fn getaudit "auditinfo_t *auditinfo"
.Ft int
.Fn getaudit_addr "auditinfo_addr_t *auditinfo_addr" "u_int length"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getaudit
system call
retrieves the active audit session state for the current process via the
.Vt auditinfo_t
pointed to by
.Fa auditinfo .
The
.Fn getaudit_addr
system call
retrieves extended state via
.Fa auditinfo_addr
and
.Fa length .
.Pp
The
.Fa auditinfo_t
data structure is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct auditinfo {
	au_id_t        ai_auid;         /* Audit user ID */
	au_mask_t      ai_mask;         /* Audit masks */
	au_tid_t       ai_termid;       /* Terminal ID */
	au_asid_t      ai_asid;         /* Audit session ID */
};
typedef struct auditinfo        auditinfo_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa ai_auid
variable contains the audit identifier which is recorded in the audit log for
each event the process caused.
.Pp
The
.Fa au_mask_t
data structure defines the bit mask for auditing successful and failed events
out of the predefined list of event classes.
It is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct au_mask {
	unsigned int    am_success;     /* success bits */
	unsigned int    am_failure;     /* failure bits */
};
typedef struct au_mask  au_mask_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa au_termid_t
data structure defines the Terminal ID recorded with every event caused by the
process.
It is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct au_tid {
	dev_t           port;
	u_int32_t       machine;
};
typedef struct au_tid   au_tid_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa ai_asid
variable contains the audit session ID which is recorded with every event
caused by the process.
.Pp
The
.Fn getaudit_addr
system call
uses the expanded
.Fa auditinfo_addr_t
data structure and supports Terminal IDs with larger addresses
such as those used in IP version 6.
It is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct auditinfo_addr {
	au_id_t         ai_auid;        /* Audit user ID. */
	au_mask_t       ai_mask;        /* Audit masks. */
	au_tid_addr_t   ai_termid;      /* Terminal ID. */
	au_asid_t       ai_asid;        /* Audit session ID. */
};
typedef struct auditinfo_addr   auditinfo_addr_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa au_tid_addr_t
data structure which includes a larger address storage field and an additional
field with the type of address stored:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct au_tid_addr {
	dev_t           at_port;
	u_int32_t       at_type;
	u_int32_t       at_addr[4];
};
typedef struct au_tid_addr      au_tid_addr_t;
.Ed
.Pp
These system calls require an appropriate privilege to complete.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std getaudit getaudit_addr
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn getaudit
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
A failure occurred while data transferred to or from
the kernel failed.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
Illegal argument was passed by a system call.
.It Bq Er EPERM
The process does not have sufficient permission to complete
the operation.
.It Bq Er EOVERFLOW
The
.Fa length
argument indicates an overflow condition will occur.
.It Bq Er E2BIG
The address is too big and, therefore,
.Fn getaudit_addr
should be used instead.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit 2 ,
.Xr auditon 2 ,
.Xr getauid 2 ,
.Xr setaudit 2 ,
.Xr setauid 2 ,
.Xr libbsm 3
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.\& in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include
.An Wayne Salamon ,
.An Robert Watson ,
and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Robert Watson Aq rwatson@FreeBSD.org .
