Documentation/sound/soc/dapm.rst, before:

===================================================
Dynamic Audio Power Management for Portable Devices
===================================================

Description
===========

Dynamic Audio Power Management (DAPM) is designed to allow portable
Linux devices to use the minimum amount of power within the audio
subsystem at all times. It is independent of other kernel power
management frameworks and, as such, can easily co-exist with them.

DAPM is also completely transparent to all user space applications as
all power switching is done within the ASoC core. No code changes or
recompiling are required for user space applications. DAPM makes power
switching decisions based upon any audio stream (capture/playback)
activity and audio mixer settings within the device.

DAPM is based on two basic elements, called widgets and routes:

 * a **widget** is every part of the audio hardware that can be enabled by
   software when in use and disabled to save power when not in use
 * a **route** is an interconnection between widgets that exists when sound
   can flow from one widget to the other

All DAPM power switching decisions are made automatically by consulting an
audio routing graph. This graph is specific to each sound card and spans
the whole sound card, so some DAPM routes connect two widgets belonging to
different components (e.g. the LINE OUT pin of a CODEC and the input pin of
an amplifier).

The graph for the STM32MP1-DK1 sound card is shown in picture:

.. kernel-figure:: dapm-graph.svg
    :alt:   Example DAPM graph
    :align: center

DAPM power domains
==================

There are 4 power domains within DAPM:

Codec bias domain
      VREF, VMID (core codec and audio power)

      Usually controlled at codec probe/remove and suspend/resume, although
      can be set at stream time if power is not needed for sidetone, etc.

Platform/Machine domain
      physically connected inputs and outputs

      Is platform/machine and user action specific, is configured by the
      machine driver and responds to asynchronous events e.g when HP
      are inserted

Path domain
      audio subsystem signal paths

      Automatically set when mixer and mux settings are changed by the user.
      e.g. alsamixer, amixer.

Stream domain
      DACs and ADCs.

      Enabled and disabled when stream playback/capture is started and
      stopped respectively. e.g. aplay, arecord.


DAPM Widgets
============

Audio DAPM widgets fall into a number of types:

Mixer
	Mixes several analog signals into a single analog signal.
Mux
	An analog switch that outputs only one of many inputs.
PGA
	A programmable gain amplifier or attenuation widget.
ADC
	Analog to Digital Converter
DAC
	Digital to Analog Converter
Switch
	An analog switch
Input
	A codec input pin
Output
	A codec output pin
Headphone
	Headphone (and optional Jack)
Mic
	Mic (and optional Jack)
Line
	Line Input/Output (and optional Jack)
Speaker
	Speaker
Supply
	Power or clock supply widget used by other widgets.
Regulator
	External regulator that supplies power to audio components.
Clock
	External clock that supplies clock to audio components.
AIF IN
	Audio Interface Input (with TDM slot mask).
AIF OUT
	Audio Interface Output (with TDM slot mask).
Siggen
	Signal Generator.
DAI IN
	Digital Audio Interface Input.
DAI OUT
	Digital Audio Interface Output.
DAI Link
	DAI Link between two DAI structures
Pre
	Special PRE widget (exec before all others)
Post
	Special POST widget (exec after all others)
Buffer
	Inter widget audio data buffer within a DSP.
Scheduler
	DSP internal scheduler that schedules component/pipeline processing
	work.
Effect
	Widget that performs an audio processing effect.
SRC
	Sample Rate Converter within DSP or CODEC
ASRC
	Asynchronous Sample Rate Converter within DSP or CODEC
Encoder
	Widget that encodes audio data from one format (usually PCM) to another
	usually more compressed format.
Decoder
	Widget that decodes audio data from a compressed format to an
	uncompressed format like PCM.


(Widgets are defined in include/sound/soc-dapm.h)

Widgets can be added to the sound card by any of the component driver types.
There are convenience macros defined in soc-dapm.h that can be used to quickly
build a list of widgets of the codecs and machines DAPM widgets.

Most widgets have a name, register, shift and invert. Some widgets have extra
parameters for stream name and kcontrols.


Stream Domain Widgets
---------------------

Stream Widgets relate to the stream power domain and only consist of ADCs
(analog to digital converters), DACs (digital to analog converters),
AIF IN and AIF OUT.

Stream widgets have the following format:
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_DAC(name, stream name, reg, shift, invert),
  SND_SOC_DAPM_AIF_IN(name, stream, slot, reg, shift, invert)

NOTE: the stream name must match the corresponding stream name in your codec
snd_soc_dai_driver.

e.g. stream widgets for HiFi playback and capture
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_DAC("HiFi DAC", "HiFi Playback", REG, 3, 1),
  SND_SOC_DAPM_ADC("HiFi ADC", "HiFi Capture", REG, 2, 1),

e.g. stream widgets for AIF
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_AIF_IN("AIF1RX", "AIF1 Playback", 0, SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0),
  SND_SOC_DAPM_AIF_OUT("AIF1TX", "AIF1 Capture", 0, SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0),


Path Domain Widgets
-------------------

Path domain widgets have a ability to control or affect the audio signal or
audio paths within the audio subsystem. They have the following form:
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_PGA(name, reg, shift, invert, controls, num_controls)

Any widget kcontrols can be set using the controls and num_controls members.

e.g. Mixer widget (the kcontrols are declared first)
::

  /* Output Mixer */
  static const snd_kcontrol_new_t wm8731_output_mixer_controls[] = {
  SOC_DAPM_SINGLE("Line Bypass Switch", WM8731_APANA, 3, 1, 0),
  SOC_DAPM_SINGLE("Mic Sidetone Switch", WM8731_APANA, 5, 1, 0),
  SOC_DAPM_SINGLE("HiFi Playback Switch", WM8731_APANA, 4, 1, 0),
  };

  SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER("Output Mixer", WM8731_PWR, 4, 1, wm8731_output_mixer_controls,
	ARRAY_SIZE(wm8731_output_mixer_controls)),

If you don't want the mixer elements prefixed with the name of the mixer widget,
you can use SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER_NAMED_CTL instead. the parameters are the same
as for SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER.


Machine domain Widgets
----------------------

Machine widgets are different from codec widgets in that they don't have a
codec register bit associated with them. A machine widget is assigned to each
machine audio component (non codec or DSP) that can be independently
powered. e.g.

* Speaker Amp
* Microphone Bias
* Jack connectors

A machine widget can have an optional call back.

e.g. Jack connector widget for an external Mic that enables Mic Bias
when the Mic is inserted::

  static int spitz_mic_bias(struct snd_soc_dapm_widget* w, int event)
  {
	gpio_set_value(SPITZ_GPIO_MIC_BIAS, SND_SOC_DAPM_EVENT_ON(event));
	return 0;
  }

  SND_SOC_DAPM_MIC("Mic Jack", spitz_mic_bias),


Codec (BIAS) Domain
-------------------

The codec bias power domain has no widgets and is handled by the codec DAPM
event handler. This handler is called when the codec powerstate is changed wrt
to any stream event or by kernel PM events.


Virtual Widgets
---------------

Sometimes widgets exist in the codec or machine audio graph that don't have any
corresponding soft power control. In this case it is necessary to create
a virtual widget - a widget with no control bits e.g.
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER("AC97 Mixer", SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0, NULL, 0),

This can be used to merge two signal paths together in software.

Registering DAPM controls
=========================

In many cases the DAPM widgets are implemented statically in a ``static
const struct snd_soc_dapm_widget`` array in a codec driver, and simply
declared via the ``dapm_widgets`` and ``num_dapm_widgets`` fields of the
``struct snd_soc_component_driver``.

Similarly, routes connecting them are implemented statically in a ``static
const struct snd_soc_dapm_route`` array and declared via the
``dapm_routes`` and ``num_dapm_routes`` fields of the same struct.

With the above declared, the driver registration will take care of
populating them::

  static const struct snd_soc_dapm_widget wm2000_dapm_widgets[] = {
  	SND_SOC_DAPM_OUTPUT("SPKN"),
  	SND_SOC_DAPM_OUTPUT("SPKP"),
  	...
  };

  /* Target, Path, Source */
  static const struct snd_soc_dapm_route wm2000_audio_map[] = {
  	{ "SPKN", NULL, "ANC Engine" },
  	{ "SPKP", NULL, "ANC Engine" },
	...
  };

  static const struct snd_soc_component_driver soc_component_dev_wm2000 = {
	...
  	.dapm_widgets		= wm2000_dapm_widgets,
  	.num_dapm_widgets	= ARRAY_SIZE(wm2000_dapm_widgets),
  	.dapm_routes            = wm2000_audio_map,
  	.num_dapm_routes        = ARRAY_SIZE(wm2000_audio_map),
	...
  };

In more complex cases the list of DAPM widgets and/or routes can be only
known at probe time. This happens for example when a driver supports
different models having a different set of features. In those cases
separate widgets and routes arrays implementing the case-specific features
can be registered programmatically by calling snd_soc_dapm_new_controls()
and snd_soc_dapm_add_routes().


Codec/DSP Widget Interconnections
=================================

Widgets are connected to each other within the codec, platform and machine by
audio paths (called interconnections). Each interconnection must be defined in
order to create a graph of all audio paths between widgets.

This is easiest with a diagram of the codec or DSP (and schematic of the machine
audio system), as it requires joining widgets together via their audio signal
paths.

For example the WM8731 output mixer (wm8731.c) has 3 inputs (sources):

1. Line Bypass Input
2. DAC (HiFi playback)
3. Mic Sidetone Input

Each input in this example has a kcontrol associated with it (defined in
the example above) and is connected to the output mixer via its kcontrol
name. We can now connect the destination widget (wrt audio signal) with its
source widgets.  ::

	/* output mixer */
	{"Output Mixer", "Line Bypass Switch", "Line Input"},
	{"Output Mixer", "HiFi Playback Switch", "DAC"},
	{"Output Mixer", "Mic Sidetone Switch", "Mic Bias"},

So we have:

* Destination Widget  <=== Path Name <=== Source Widget, or
* Sink, Path, Source, or
* ``Output Mixer`` is connected to the ``DAC`` via the ``HiFi Playback Switch``.

When there is no path name connecting widgets (e.g. a direct connection) we
pass NULL for the path name.

Interconnections are created with a call to::

  snd_soc_dapm_connect_input(codec, sink, path, source);

Finally, snd_soc_dapm_new_widgets() must be called after all widgets and
interconnections have been registered with the core. This causes the core to
scan the codec and machine so that the internal DAPM state matches the
physical state of the machine.


Machine Widget Interconnections
-------------------------------
Machine widget interconnections are created in the same way as codec ones and
directly connect the codec pins to machine level widgets.

e.g. connects the speaker out codec pins to the internal speaker.
::

	/* ext speaker connected to codec pins LOUT2, ROUT2  */
	{"Ext Spk", NULL , "ROUT2"},
	{"Ext Spk", NULL , "LOUT2"},

This allows the DAPM to power on and off pins that are connected (and in use)
and pins that are NC respectively.


Endpoint Widgets
================
An endpoint is a start or end point (widget) of an audio signal within the
machine and includes the codec. e.g.

* Headphone Jack
* Internal Speaker
* Internal Mic
* Mic Jack
* Codec Pins

Endpoints are added to the DAPM graph so that their usage can be determined in
order to save power. e.g. NC codecs pins will be switched OFF, unconnected
jacks can also be switched OFF.


DAPM Widget Events
==================

Widgets needing to implement a more complex behaviour than what DAPM can do
can set a custom "event handler" by setting a function pointer. An example
is a power supply needing to enable a GPIO::

  static int sof_es8316_speaker_power_event(struct snd_soc_dapm_widget *w,
  					  struct snd_kcontrol *kcontrol, int event)
  {
  	if (SND_SOC_DAPM_EVENT_ON(event))
  		gpiod_set_value_cansleep(gpio_pa, true);
  	else
  		gpiod_set_value_cansleep(gpio_pa, false);

  	return 0;
  }

  static const struct snd_soc_dapm_widget st_widgets[] = {
  	...
  	SND_SOC_DAPM_SUPPLY("Speaker Power", SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0,
  			    sof_es8316_speaker_power_event,
  			    SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMD | SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMU),
  };

See soc-dapm.h for all other widgets that support events.


Event types
-----------

The following event types are supported by event widgets::

  /* dapm event types */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMU		0x1	/* before widget power up */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMU		0x2	/* after  widget power up */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMD		0x4	/* before widget power down */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMD		0x8	/* after  widget power down */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_REG		0x10	/* before audio path setup */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_REG		0x20	/* after  audio path setup */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_WILL_PMU		0x40	/* called at start of sequence */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_WILL_PMD		0x80	/* called at start of sequence */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_POST_PMD	(SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMD | SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMD)
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_POST_PMU	(SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMU | SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMU)

Commit message:

ASoC: doc: dapm: Add location information for dapm-graph tool
To help developers debug DAPM issues and visualize widget connectivity,
the dapm-graph tool provides a graphical representation of how widgets
and routes are connected. This commit adds the location information for
the tool to the documentation, making it easier for users to find and
use it for troubleshooting DAPM-related problems.

Signed-off-by: anish kumar <yesanishhere@gmail.com>
Link: https://patch.msgid.link/20241121232958.46179-1-yesanishhere@gmail.com
Signed-off-by: Mark Brown <broonie@kernel.org>

Documentation/sound/soc/dapm.rst, after:

===================================================
Dynamic Audio Power Management for Portable Devices
===================================================

Description
===========

Dynamic Audio Power Management (DAPM) is designed to allow portable
Linux devices to use the minimum amount of power within the audio
subsystem at all times. It is independent of other kernel power
management frameworks and, as such, can easily co-exist with them.

DAPM is also completely transparent to all user space applications as
all power switching is done within the ASoC core. No code changes or
recompiling are required for user space applications. DAPM makes power
switching decisions based upon any audio stream (capture/playback)
activity and audio mixer settings within the device.

DAPM is based on two basic elements, called widgets and routes:

 * a **widget** is every part of the audio hardware that can be enabled by
   software when in use and disabled to save power when not in use
 * a **route** is an interconnection between widgets that exists when sound
   can flow from one widget to the other

All DAPM power switching decisions are made automatically by consulting an
audio routing graph. This graph is specific to each sound card and spans
the whole sound card, so some DAPM routes connect two widgets belonging to
different components (e.g. the LINE OUT pin of a CODEC and the input pin of
an amplifier).

The graph for the STM32MP1-DK1 sound card is shown in picture:

.. kernel-figure:: dapm-graph.svg
    :alt:   Example DAPM graph
    :align: center

You can also generate compatible graph for your sound card using
`tools/sound/dapm-graph` utility.

DAPM power domains
==================

There are 4 power domains within DAPM:

Codec bias domain
      VREF, VMID (core codec and audio power)

      Usually controlled at codec probe/remove and suspend/resume, although
      can be set at stream time if power is not needed for sidetone, etc.

Platform/Machine domain
      physically connected inputs and outputs

      Is platform/machine and user action specific, is configured by the
      machine driver and responds to asynchronous events e.g when HP
      are inserted

Path domain
      audio subsystem signal paths

      Automatically set when mixer and mux settings are changed by the user.
      e.g. alsamixer, amixer.

Stream domain
      DACs and ADCs.

      Enabled and disabled when stream playback/capture is started and
      stopped respectively. e.g. aplay, arecord.


DAPM Widgets
============

Audio DAPM widgets fall into a number of types:

Mixer
	Mixes several analog signals into a single analog signal.
Mux
	An analog switch that outputs only one of many inputs.
PGA
	A programmable gain amplifier or attenuation widget.
ADC
	Analog to Digital Converter
DAC
	Digital to Analog Converter
Switch
	An analog switch
Input
	A codec input pin
Output
	A codec output pin
Headphone
	Headphone (and optional Jack)
Mic
	Mic (and optional Jack)
Line
	Line Input/Output (and optional Jack)
Speaker
	Speaker
Supply
	Power or clock supply widget used by other widgets.
Regulator
	External regulator that supplies power to audio components.
Clock
	External clock that supplies clock to audio components.
AIF IN
	Audio Interface Input (with TDM slot mask).
AIF OUT
	Audio Interface Output (with TDM slot mask).
Siggen
	Signal Generator.
DAI IN
	Digital Audio Interface Input.
DAI OUT
	Digital Audio Interface Output.
DAI Link
	DAI Link between two DAI structures
Pre
	Special PRE widget (exec before all others)
Post
	Special POST widget (exec after all others)
Buffer
	Inter widget audio data buffer within a DSP.
Scheduler
	DSP internal scheduler that schedules component/pipeline processing
	work.
Effect
	Widget that performs an audio processing effect.
SRC
	Sample Rate Converter within DSP or CODEC
ASRC
	Asynchronous Sample Rate Converter within DSP or CODEC
Encoder
	Widget that encodes audio data from one format (usually PCM) to another
	usually more compressed format.
Decoder
	Widget that decodes audio data from a compressed format to an
	uncompressed format like PCM.


(Widgets are defined in include/sound/soc-dapm.h)

Widgets can be added to the sound card by any of the component driver types.
There are convenience macros defined in soc-dapm.h that can be used to quickly
build a list of widgets of the codecs and machines DAPM widgets.

Most widgets have a name, register, shift and invert. Some widgets have extra
parameters for stream name and kcontrols.


Stream Domain Widgets
---------------------

Stream Widgets relate to the stream power domain and only consist of ADCs
(analog to digital converters), DACs (digital to analog converters),
AIF IN and AIF OUT.

Stream widgets have the following format:
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_DAC(name, stream name, reg, shift, invert),
  SND_SOC_DAPM_AIF_IN(name, stream, slot, reg, shift, invert)

NOTE: the stream name must match the corresponding stream name in your codec
snd_soc_dai_driver.

e.g. stream widgets for HiFi playback and capture
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_DAC("HiFi DAC", "HiFi Playback", REG, 3, 1),
  SND_SOC_DAPM_ADC("HiFi ADC", "HiFi Capture", REG, 2, 1),

e.g. stream widgets for AIF
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_AIF_IN("AIF1RX", "AIF1 Playback", 0, SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0),
  SND_SOC_DAPM_AIF_OUT("AIF1TX", "AIF1 Capture", 0, SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0),


Path Domain Widgets
-------------------

Path domain widgets have a ability to control or affect the audio signal or
audio paths within the audio subsystem. They have the following form:
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_PGA(name, reg, shift, invert, controls, num_controls)

Any widget kcontrols can be set using the controls and num_controls members.

e.g. Mixer widget (the kcontrols are declared first)
::

  /* Output Mixer */
  static const snd_kcontrol_new_t wm8731_output_mixer_controls[] = {
  SOC_DAPM_SINGLE("Line Bypass Switch", WM8731_APANA, 3, 1, 0),
  SOC_DAPM_SINGLE("Mic Sidetone Switch", WM8731_APANA, 5, 1, 0),
  SOC_DAPM_SINGLE("HiFi Playback Switch", WM8731_APANA, 4, 1, 0),
  };

  SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER("Output Mixer", WM8731_PWR, 4, 1, wm8731_output_mixer_controls,
	ARRAY_SIZE(wm8731_output_mixer_controls)),

If you don't want the mixer elements prefixed with the name of the mixer widget,
you can use SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER_NAMED_CTL instead. the parameters are the same
as for SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER.


Machine domain Widgets
----------------------

Machine widgets are different from codec widgets in that they don't have a
codec register bit associated with them. A machine widget is assigned to each
machine audio component (non codec or DSP) that can be independently
powered. e.g.

* Speaker Amp
* Microphone Bias
* Jack connectors

A machine widget can have an optional call back.

e.g. Jack connector widget for an external Mic that enables Mic Bias
when the Mic is inserted::

  static int spitz_mic_bias(struct snd_soc_dapm_widget* w, int event)
  {
	gpio_set_value(SPITZ_GPIO_MIC_BIAS, SND_SOC_DAPM_EVENT_ON(event));
	return 0;
  }

  SND_SOC_DAPM_MIC("Mic Jack", spitz_mic_bias),


Codec (BIAS) Domain
-------------------

The codec bias power domain has no widgets and is handled by the codec DAPM
event handler. This handler is called when the codec powerstate is changed wrt
to any stream event or by kernel PM events.


Virtual Widgets
---------------

Sometimes widgets exist in the codec or machine audio graph that don't have any
corresponding soft power control. In this case it is necessary to create
a virtual widget - a widget with no control bits e.g.
::

  SND_SOC_DAPM_MIXER("AC97 Mixer", SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0, NULL, 0),

This can be used to merge two signal paths together in software.

Registering DAPM controls
=========================

In many cases the DAPM widgets are implemented statically in a ``static
const struct snd_soc_dapm_widget`` array in a codec driver, and simply
declared via the ``dapm_widgets`` and ``num_dapm_widgets`` fields of the
``struct snd_soc_component_driver``.

Similarly, routes connecting them are implemented statically in a ``static
const struct snd_soc_dapm_route`` array and declared via the
``dapm_routes`` and ``num_dapm_routes`` fields of the same struct.

With the above declared, the driver registration will take care of
populating them::

  static const struct snd_soc_dapm_widget wm2000_dapm_widgets[] = {
  	SND_SOC_DAPM_OUTPUT("SPKN"),
  	SND_SOC_DAPM_OUTPUT("SPKP"),
  	...
  };

  /* Target, Path, Source */
  static const struct snd_soc_dapm_route wm2000_audio_map[] = {
  	{ "SPKN", NULL, "ANC Engine" },
  	{ "SPKP", NULL, "ANC Engine" },
	...
  };

  static const struct snd_soc_component_driver soc_component_dev_wm2000 = {
	...
  	.dapm_widgets		= wm2000_dapm_widgets,
  	.num_dapm_widgets	= ARRAY_SIZE(wm2000_dapm_widgets),
  	.dapm_routes            = wm2000_audio_map,
  	.num_dapm_routes        = ARRAY_SIZE(wm2000_audio_map),
	...
  };

In more complex cases the list of DAPM widgets and/or routes can be only
known at probe time. This happens for example when a driver supports
different models having a different set of features. In those cases
separate widgets and routes arrays implementing the case-specific features
can be registered programmatically by calling snd_soc_dapm_new_controls()
and snd_soc_dapm_add_routes().


Codec/DSP Widget Interconnections
=================================

Widgets are connected to each other within the codec, platform and machine by
audio paths (called interconnections). Each interconnection must be defined in
order to create a graph of all audio paths between widgets.

This is easiest with a diagram of the codec or DSP (and schematic of the machine
audio system), as it requires joining widgets together via their audio signal
paths.

For example the WM8731 output mixer (wm8731.c) has 3 inputs (sources):

1. Line Bypass Input
2. DAC (HiFi playback)
3. Mic Sidetone Input

Each input in this example has a kcontrol associated with it (defined in
the example above) and is connected to the output mixer via its kcontrol
name. We can now connect the destination widget (wrt audio signal) with its
source widgets.  ::

	/* output mixer */
	{"Output Mixer", "Line Bypass Switch", "Line Input"},
	{"Output Mixer", "HiFi Playback Switch", "DAC"},
	{"Output Mixer", "Mic Sidetone Switch", "Mic Bias"},

So we have:

* Destination Widget  <=== Path Name <=== Source Widget, or
* Sink, Path, Source, or
* ``Output Mixer`` is connected to the ``DAC`` via the ``HiFi Playback Switch``.

When there is no path name connecting widgets (e.g. a direct connection) we
pass NULL for the path name.

Interconnections are created with a call to::

  snd_soc_dapm_connect_input(codec, sink, path, source);

Finally, snd_soc_dapm_new_widgets() must be called after all widgets and
interconnections have been registered with the core. This causes the core to
scan the codec and machine so that the internal DAPM state matches the
physical state of the machine.


Machine Widget Interconnections
-------------------------------
Machine widget interconnections are created in the same way as codec ones and
directly connect the codec pins to machine level widgets.

e.g. connects the speaker out codec pins to the internal speaker.
::

	/* ext speaker connected to codec pins LOUT2, ROUT2  */
	{"Ext Spk", NULL , "ROUT2"},
	{"Ext Spk", NULL , "LOUT2"},

This allows the DAPM to power on and off pins that are connected (and in use)
and pins that are NC respectively.


Endpoint Widgets
================
An endpoint is a start or end point (widget) of an audio signal within the
machine and includes the codec. e.g.

* Headphone Jack
* Internal Speaker
* Internal Mic
* Mic Jack
* Codec Pins

Endpoints are added to the DAPM graph so that their usage can be determined in
order to save power. e.g. NC codecs pins will be switched OFF, unconnected
jacks can also be switched OFF.


DAPM Widget Events
==================

Widgets needing to implement a more complex behaviour than what DAPM can do
can set a custom "event handler" by setting a function pointer. An example
is a power supply needing to enable a GPIO::

  static int sof_es8316_speaker_power_event(struct snd_soc_dapm_widget *w,
  					  struct snd_kcontrol *kcontrol, int event)
  {
  	if (SND_SOC_DAPM_EVENT_ON(event))
  		gpiod_set_value_cansleep(gpio_pa, true);
  	else
  		gpiod_set_value_cansleep(gpio_pa, false);

  	return 0;
  }

  static const struct snd_soc_dapm_widget st_widgets[] = {
  	...
  	SND_SOC_DAPM_SUPPLY("Speaker Power", SND_SOC_NOPM, 0, 0,
  			    sof_es8316_speaker_power_event,
  			    SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMD | SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMU),
  };

See soc-dapm.h for all other widgets that support events.


Event types
-----------

The following event types are supported by event widgets::

  /* dapm event types */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMU		0x1	/* before widget power up */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMU		0x2	/* after  widget power up */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMD		0x4	/* before widget power down */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMD		0x8	/* after  widget power down */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_REG		0x10	/* before audio path setup */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_REG		0x20	/* after  audio path setup */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_WILL_PMU		0x40	/* called at start of sequence */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_WILL_PMD		0x80	/* called at start of sequence */
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_POST_PMD	(SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMD | SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMD)
  #define SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_POST_PMU	(SND_SOC_DAPM_PRE_PMU | SND_SOC_DAPM_POST_PMU)
