.\" Licensed under the OpenIB.org BSD license (FreeBSD Variant) - See COPYING.md
.TH "CMTIME" 1 "2017-04-28" "librdmacm" "librdmacm" librdmacm
.SH NAME
cmtime \- RDMA CM connection steps timing test.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.sp
.nf
\fIcmtime\fR [-s server_address] [-b bind_address]
			[-c connections] [-p port_number]
			[-r retries] [-t timeout_ms]
.fi
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Determines min and max times for various "steps" in RDMA CM
connection setup and teardown between a client and server
application.

"Steps" that are timed are: create id, bind address, resolve address,
resolve route, create qp, connect, disconnect, and destroy.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\-s server_address
The network name or IP address of the server system listening for
connections.  The used name or address must route over an RDMA device.
This option must be specified by the client.
.TP
\-b bind_address
The local network address to bind to.
.TP
\-c connections
The number of connections to establish between the client and
server.  (default 100)
.TP
\-p port_number
The server's port number.
.TP
\-r retries
Number of retries when resolving address or route.  (default 2)
.TP
\-t timeout_ms
Timeout in millseconds (ms) when resolving address or
route.  (default 2000 - 2 seconds)
.SH "NOTES"
Basic usage is to start cmtime on a server system, then run
cmtime -s server_name on a client system.
.P
Because this test maps RDMA resources to userspace, users must ensure
that they have available system resources and permissions.  See the
libibverbs README file for additional details.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rdma_cm(7)
