.\" Licensed under the OpenIB.org BSD license (FreeBSD Variant) - See COPYING.md
.TH "RDMA_POST_WRITE" 3 "2010-07-19" "librdmacm" "Librdmacm Programmer's Manual" librdmacm
.SH NAME
rdma_post_write \- post an RDMA write work request.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "#include <rdma/rdma_verbs.h>"
.P
.B "int" rdma_post_write
.BI "(struct rdma_cm_id *" id ","
.BI "void *" context ","
.BI "void *" addr ","
.BI "size_t " length ","
.BI "struct ibv_mr *" mr ","
.BI "int " flags ","
.BI "uint64_t " remote_addr ","
.BI "uint32_t " rkey ");"
.SH ARGUMENTS
.IP "id" 12
A reference to a communication identifier where the request 
will be posted.
.IP "context" 12
User-defined context associated with the request.
.IP "addr" 12
The local address of the source of the write request.
.IP "length" 12
The length of the write operation.
.IP "mr" 12
Optional memory region associated with the local buffer.
.IP "flags" 12
Optional flags used to control the write operation.
.IP "remote_addr" 12
The address of the remote registered memory to write into.
.IP "rkey" 12
The registered memory key associated with the remote address.
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Posts a work request to the send queue of the queue pair associated
with the rdma_cm_id.  The contents of the local data buffer will be
written into the remote memory region.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error.  If an error occurs, errno will be
set to indicate the failure reason.
.SH "NOTES"
For a list of supported flags, see ibv_post_send.  Unless inline
data is specified, the local data buffer must have been registered
before the write is issued, and the buffer must remain registered
until the write completes.  The remote buffer must always be registered.
.P
Write operations may not be posted to an rdma_cm_id or the corresponding
queue pair until it has been connected.
.P
The user-defined context associated with the write request will be
returned to the user through the work completion wr_id, work request
identifier, field.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rdma_cm(7), rdma_connect(3), rdma_accept(3),
ibv_post_send(3), rdma_post_writev(3), rdma_reg_write(3), rdma_reg_msgs(3)
