.\" Licensed under the OpenIB.org BSD license (FreeBSD Variant) - See COPYING.md
.TH "RDMA_POST_RECVV" 3 "2010-07-19" "librdmacm" "Librdmacm Programmer's Manual" librdmacm
.SH NAME
rdma_post_recvv \- post a work request to receive incoming messages.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "#include <rdma/rdma_verbs.h>"
.P
.B "int" rdma_post_recvv
.BI "(struct rdma_cm_id *" id ","
.BI "void *" context ","
.BI "struct ibv_sge *" sgl ","
.BI "int " nsge ");"
.SH ARGUMENTS
.IP "id" 12
A reference to a communication identifier where the message buffer(s)
will be posted.
.IP "context" 12
User-defined context associated with the request.
.IP "sgl" 12
A scatter-gather list of memory buffers posted as a single request.
.IP "nsge" 12
The number of scatter-gather entries in the sgl array.
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Posts a single work request to the receive queue of the queue pair associated
with the rdma_cm_id.  The posted buffers will be queued to receive an
incoming message sent by the remote peer.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error.  If an error occurs, errno will be
set to indicate the failure reason.
.SH "NOTES"
The user is responsible for ensuring that the receive is posted,
and the total buffer space is large enough to contain all sent data
before the peer posts the corresponding send message.  The message buffers
must have been registered before being posted, and the buffers must
remain registered until the receive completes.
.P
Messages may be posted to an rdma_cm_id only after a queue pair has
been associated with it.  A queue pair is bound to an rdma_cm_id after
calling rdma_create_ep or rdma_create_qp, if the rdma_cm_id is allocated
using rdma_create_id.
.P
The user-defined context associated with the receive request will be
returned to the user through the work completion wr_id, work request
identifier, field.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rdma_cm(7), rdma_create_id(3), rdma_create_ep(3), rdma_create_qp(3),
rdma_reg_read(3), ibv_reg_mr(3), ibv_dereg_mr(3),
rdma_post_recv(3), rdma_post_send(3)
