.\" Licensed under the OpenIB.org BSD license (FreeBSD Variant) - See COPYING.md
.TH "RSTREAM" 1 "2011-11-16" "librdmacm" "librdmacm" librdmacm
.SH NAME
rstream \- streaming over RDMA ping-pong test.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.sp
.nf
\fIrstream\fR [-s server_address] [-b bind_address] [-f address_format]
			[-B buffer_size] [-I iterations] [-C transfer_count]
			[-S transfer_size] [-p server_port] [-T test_option]
.fi
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Uses the streaming over RDMA protocol (rsocket) to connect and exchange
data between a client and server application.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\-s server_address
The network name or IP address of the server system listening for
connections.  The used name or address must route over an RDMA device.
This option must be specified by the client.
.TP
\-b bind_address
The local network address to bind to.
.TP
\-f address_format
Supported address formats are ip, ipv6, gid, or name.
.TP
\-B buffer_size
Indicates the size of the send and receive network buffers.
.TP
\-I iterations
The number of times that the specified number of messages will be
exchanged between the client and server.  (default 1000)
.TP
\-C transfer_count
The number of messages to transfer from the client to the server and
back again on each iteration.  (default 1000)
.TP
\-S transfer_size
The size of each send transfer, in bytes.  (default 1000)  If 'all'
is specified, rstream will run a series of tests of various sizes.
.TP
\-p server_port
The server's port number.
.TP
\-T test_option
Specifies test parameters.  Available options are:
.P
s | socket  - uses standard socket calls to transfer data
.P
a | async - uses asynchronous operation (e.g. select / poll)
.P
b | blocking - uses blocking calls
.P
f | fork - fork server processing (forces -T s option)
.P
n | nonblocking - uses non-blocking calls
.P
r | resolve - use rdma cm to resolve address
.P
v | verify - verifies data transfers
.SH "NOTES"
Basic usage is to start rstream on a server system, then run
rstream -s server_name on a client system.  By default, rstream
will run a series of latency and bandwidth performance tests.
Specifying a different iterations, transfer_count, or transfer_size
will run a user customized test using default values where none
have been specified.
.P
Because this test maps RDMA resources to userspace, users must ensure
that they have available system resources and permissions.  See the
libibverbs README file for additional details.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rdma_cm(7)
