.\" Licensed under the OpenIB.org BSD license (FreeBSD Variant) - See COPYING.md
.TH "UCMATOSE" 1 "2007-05-15" "librdmacm" "librdmacm" librdmacm
.SH NAME
ucmatose \- RDMA CM connection and simple ping-pong test.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.sp
.nf
\fIucmatose\fR [-s server_address] [-b bind_address]
		[-f address_format] [-P port_space]
		[-c connections] [-C message_count] [-S message_size]
\fIucmatose\fR -s server_address [-b bind_address]
		[-f address_format] [-P port_space]
		[-c connections] [-C message_count] [-S message_size] [-t tos]
.fi
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Establishes a set of reliable RDMA connections between two nodes using the
librdmacm, optionally transfers data between the nodes, then disconnects.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\-s server_address
The network name or IP address of the server system listening for
connections.  The used name or address must route over an RDMA device.
This option must be specified by the client.
.TP
\-b bind_address
The local network address to bind to.
To bind to any address with IPv6 use -b ::0 .
.TP
\-f address_format
Specifies the format of the server and bind address.  Be default, the
format is determined by getaddrinfo() as either being a hostname, an IPv4
address, or an IPv6 address.  This option may be used to indicate that
a specific address format has been provided.  Supported address_format
values are: name, ip, ipv6, and gid.
.TP
\-P port_space
Specifies the port space for the connection.  Be default, the port space
is the RDMA TCP port space. (Note that the RDMA port space may be separate
from that used for IP.)  Supported port_space values are: tcp and ib.
.TP
\-c connections
The number of connections to establish between the client and server.
(default 1)
.TP
\-C message_count
The number of messages to transfer over each connection.  (default 10)
.TP
\-S message_size
The size of each message transferred, in bytes.  (default 100)
.TP
\-t tos
Indicates the type of service used for the communication.  Type of service
is implementation dependent based on subnet configuration.
.TP
\-m
Tests event channel migration.  Migrates all communication identifiers to
a different event channel for disconnect events.
.SH "NOTES"
Basic usage is to start ucmatose on a server system, then run
ucmatose -s server_name on a client system.
.P
Because this test maps RDMA resources to userspace, users must ensure
that they have available system resources and permissions.  See the
libibverbs README file for additional details.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rdma_cm(7), udaddy(1), mckey(1), rping(1)
