.\" Licensed under the OpenIB.org BSD license (FreeBSD Variant) - See COPYING.md
.TH "UDADDY" 1 "2007-05-15" "librdmacm" "librdmacm" librdmacm
.SH NAME
udaddy \- RDMA CM datagram setup and simple ping-pong test.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.sp
.nf
\fIudaddy\fR [-s server_address] [-b bind_address] [-c connections]
		[-C message_count] [-S message_size] [-p port_space]
\fIudaddy\fR -s server_address [-b bind_address] [-c connections]
		[-C message_count] [-S message_size] [-t tos] [-p port_space]
.fi
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Establishes a set of unreliable RDMA datagram communication paths between two
nodes using the librdmacm, optionally transfers datagrams between the nodes,
then tears down the communication.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\-s server_address
The network name or IP address of the server system listening for
communication.  The used name or address must route over an RDMA device.
This option must be specified by the client.
.TP
\-b bind_address
The local network address to bind to.
To bind to any address with IPv6 use -b ::0 .
.TP
\-c connections
The number of communication paths to establish between the client and server.
The test uses unreliable datagram communication, so no actual connections are
formed.  (default 1)
.TP
\-C message_count
The number of messages to transfer over each connection.  (default 10)
.TP
\-S message_size
The size of each message transferred, in bytes.  This value must be smaller
than the MTU of the underlying RDMA transport, or an error will occur.
(default 100)
.TP
\-t tos
Indicates the type of service used for the communication.  Type of service
is implementation dependent based on subnet configuration.
.TP
\-p port_space
The port space of the datagram communication.  May be either the RDMA
UDP (0x0111) or IPoIB (0x0002) port space.  (default RDMA_PS_UDP)
.SH "NOTES"
Basic usage is to start udaddy on a server system, then run
udaddy -s server_name on a client system.
.P
Because this test maps RDMA resources to userspace, users must ensure
that they have available system resources and permissions.  See the
libibverbs README file for additional details.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rdma_cm(7), ucmatose(1), mckey(1), rping(1)
