.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Thomas Skibo <thomasskibo@yahoo.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 26, 2014
.Dt CGEM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cgem
.Nd "Cadence GEM Gigabit Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ether"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device cgem"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Cadence GEM (Gigabit Ethernet MAC).
The Cadence GEM is used in some SoC (System on a Chip) devices such as
the Xilinx Zynq-7000 and the Atmel SAMA5D3.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode using
.Xr ifconfig 8
or by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation over twisted pair.
The GEM supports 1000Mbps in
.Cm full-duplex
mode only.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full-duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half-duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
The driver provides support for TCP/UDP/IP checksum offloading (although
disabled by default).
The device and driver also support 1536-byte frames for VLANs (vlanmtu).
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxxx"
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.rxbufs
The number of receive buffers allocated to the hardware.
The default value is 256.
The maximum value is 511.
If this number is increased while the interface is UP, it will not
take effect until the next packet is received.
If this number is decreased while the interface is UP, buffers will
not be immediately removed from the receive buffer ring but the
number of buffers will decrease as packets are received until it
reaches the new value.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.rxhangwar
This tunable enables a work-around to recover from receive hangs.
The default value is 1.
Set to 0 to disable the work-around.
.El
.Pp
The following read-only variables are available as
.Xr sysctl 8
variables:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxxx"
.It Va dev.cgem.%d._rxoverruns
This variable counts the number of receive packet buffer overrun interrupts.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d._rxnobufs
This variable counts the number of interrupts due to the GEM buffer ring
going empty.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d._rxdmamapfails
This variable is the number of times bus_dmamap_load_mbuf_sg(9) failed in
the receive path.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d._txfull
The number of times the GEM's transmit ring was full.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d._txdmamapfails
This variable is the number of times bus_dmamap_load_mbuf_sg(9) failed in
the transmit path.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d._txdefrags
This variable is the number of times the driver needed to call m_defrag(9)
because a packet queued for transmit had too many DMA segments.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d._txdefragfails
This variable is the number of times
.Xr m_defrag 9
failed.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.*
The following variables are useful MAC counters supplied by the hardware:
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_bytes
A 64-bit counter of the number of bytes transmitted in frames without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames
Counter of frames transmitted without error excluding pause frames.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_bcast
Counter of broadcast frames transmitted without error excluding
pause frames.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_multi
Counter of multicast frames transmitted without error excluding
pause frames.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_pause
Counter of pause frames transmitted without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_64b
Counter of 64 byte frames transmitted without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_65to127b
Counter of 65 to 127 byte frames transmitted without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_128to255b
Counter of 128 to 255 byte frames transmitted without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_256to511b
Counter of 256 to 511 byte frames transmitted without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_512to1023b
Counter of 512 to 1023 byte frames transmitted without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_frames_1024to1536b
Counter of 1024 to 1536 byte frames transmitted without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_under_runs
Counter of frames not transmitted due to a transmit underrun.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_single_collisn
Counter of frames experiencing a single collision before being successfully
transmitted.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_multi_collisn
Counter of frames experiencing between 2 and 15 collisions before
being successfully transmitted.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_excsv_collisn
Counter of frames that failed to transmit because they experienced 16
collisions.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_late_collisn
Counter of frames that experienced a late collision.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_deferred_frames
Counter of frames experiencing deferral due to carrier sense being
active on their first attempt at transmission.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.tx_carrier_sense_errs
Counter of frames transmitted where carrier sense was not seen during
transmission or where carrier sense was deasserted after being asserted
in a transmit frame without collision.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_bytes
A 64-bit counter of bytes received without error excluding pause
frames.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames
Counter of frames received without error excluding pause frames.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_bcast
Counter of broadcast frames receive without error excluding pause frames.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_multi
Counter of multicast frames receive without error excluding pause frames.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_pause
Counter of pause frames recevied without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_64b
Counter of 64-byte frames received without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_65to127b
Counter of 65 to 127 byte frames received without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_128to255b
Counter of 128 to 255 byte frames received without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_256to511b
Counter of 256 to 511 byte frames received without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_512to1023b
Counter of 512 to 1023 byte frames received without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_1024to1536b
Counter of 1024 to 1536 byte frames received without error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_undersize
Counter of frames received less than 64 bytes in length that
do not also have either a CRC error or an alignment error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_oversize
Counter of frames received exceeding 1536 bytes and do not also have either
a CRC error or an alignment error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_jabber
Counter of frames received exceeding 1536 bytes and also have either a CRC
error, an alignment error, or a receive symbol error.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_fcs_errs
Counter of frames received with a bad CRC and are between 64
and 1536 bytes.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_length_errs
Counter of frames received that are shorter than that extracted
from the length field.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_symbol_errs
Counter of receive symbol errors.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_align_errs
Counter of received frames that are not an integral number of bytes.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_resource_errs
Counter of frames successfully receive by the MAC but could not be
copied to memory because no receive buffer was available.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_overrun_errs
Counter of frames that are address recognized but were not copied
to memory due to a receive overrun.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_ip_hdr_csum_errs
Counter of frames discarded due to an incorrect IP header checksum when
checksum offloading is enabled.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_tcp_csum_errs
Counter of frames discarded due to an incorrect TCP checksum when
checksum offloading is enabled.
.It Va dev.cgem.%d.stats.rx_frames_udp_csum_errs
Counter of frames discarded due to an incorrect UDP checksum when
checksum offloading is enabled.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T "Zynq-7000 SoC Technical Reference Manual (Xilinx doc UG585)"
.%U http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/user_guides/\:ug585-Zynq-7000-TRM.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page was written by
.An Thomas Skibo Aq Mt thomasskibo@yahoo.com .
.Sh BUGS
The GEM can perform TCP/UDP/IP checksum offloading.
However, when transmit checksum offloading is enabled, the GEM generates and
replaces checksums for all packets it transmits.
In a system that is forwarding packets, the device could potentially correct
the checksum of packet that was corrupted in transit.
For this reason, checksum offloading is disabled by default but can be
enabled using ifconfig(8).
.Pp
When receive checksum offloading is enabled, the device will discard packets
with bad TCP/UDP/IP checksums.
The bad packets will not be counted in any
.Xr netstat 1
statistics.
There are
.Xr sysctl 8
variables that count
packets discarded by the hardware (see below).
.Pp
The GEM used in the Zynq-7000 has a bug such that  the receiver can
potentially freeze up under a high load.
The issue is described in sec. 16.7
"Known Issues" of the Zynq-7000 SoC Technical Reference Manual (Xilinx
UG585 v1.7).
The
.Nm
driver implements the work-around suggested in the manual.
If the bug does not exist in other versions of this device, the
work-around can be disabled by setting the dev.cgem.%d.rxhangwar
.Xr sysctl 8
variable to 0.
