.\"	$OpenBSD: cgsix.4,v 1.22 2015/11/01 21:26:48 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Jason L. Wright (jason@thought.net)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 1 2015 $
.Dt CGSIX 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cgsix
.Nd accelerated 8-bit color frame buffer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "cgsix* at sbus? flags 0x0"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at cgsix?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is an SBus color frame buffer with graphics acceleration,
commonly found in the non
.Sq creator
SBus UltraSPARC workstations.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver interfaces the frame buffer with the
.Xr wscons 4
console framework.
It does not provide direct device driver entry points
but makes its functions available via the internal
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface.
.Pp
Different models exist, with various memory sizes and capabilities.
The
.Nm
driver supports the four flavours:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
GX
.It
GX+
.It
Turbo GX (or TGX)
.It
Turbo GX+ (or TGX+)
.El
.Pp
By default hardware acceleration is used to erase the screen and
scroll text.
By setting
.Ar flags
to
.Ar 1
(via
.Xr config 8
or
.Xr boot_config 8 )
this acceleration can be disabled.
.Sh DISPLAY RESOLUTION
If the
.Nm
frame buffer is used as the console display, a different resolution than the
default 1152x900 can be selected by changing the OpenPROM environment.
To change the default resolution, type the following:
.Pp
.Em \   ok
setenv
.Em output-device
screen:r1280x1024x76
.Pp
to change to a 76Hz 1280x1024 resolution.
.Pp
If the
.Nm
frame buffer is a secondary display, or a serial console is used, the
display resolution cannot be changed without using an
.Em nvramrc
OpenPROM script.
Refer to the
.Em Sun Frame Buffer FAQ
for details.
.Pp
The
.Nm
frame buffer accepts the following resolutions:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width screen:r1280x1024x76 -compact
.It screen:r1024x768x60
Super VGA 1024x768, with a refresh rate of 60Hz.
Only available on TGX and TGX+.
.It screen:r1024x768x70
Super VGA 1024x768, with a refresh rate of 70Hz.
Only available on TGX and TGX+.
.It screen:r1024x768x76
Super VGA 1024x768, with a refresh rate of 76Hz.
Only available on TGX and TGX+.
.It screen:r1024x800x74
1024x800, with a refresh rate of 74Hz.
Only available on TGX and TGX+.
.It screen:r1024x800x85
1024x800, with a refresh rate of 85Hz.
Only available on GX+, TGX and TGX+.
.It screen:r1152x900x66
Standard 1152x900, with a refresh rate of 66Hz.
.It screen:r1152x900x76
Standard 1152x900, with a refresh rate of 76Hz.
This is the default setting on GX and TGX.
.It screen:r1280x1024x67
High res 1280x1024, with a refresh rate of 67Hz.
Only available on GX+ and TGX+.
This is the default on GX+.
.It screen:r1280x1024x76
High res 1280x1024, with a refresh rate of 76Hz.
Only available on TGX+, where this is the default setting.
.It screen:r1600x1280x76
High res 1600x1280, with a refresh rate of 76Hz.
Only available on GX+ and TGX+.
.El
.Pp
The 1600x1280 resolution is not officially supported by
.Tn Sun
on the GX+.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sbus 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4 ,
.Xr boot_config 8 ,
.Xr config 8
.Rs
.%T Sun Frame Buffer FAQ
.%U http://www.sunhelp.org/faq/FrameBuffer.html
.Re
