.\"	$OpenBSD: cgthree.4,v 1.23 2015/11/01 21:26:48 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Jason L. Wright (jason@thought.net)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 1 2015 $
.Dt CGTHREE 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cgthree
.Nd 8-bit color frame buffer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "cgthree* at sbus?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at cgthree?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is an SBus color frame buffer.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver interfaces the frame buffer with the
.Xr wscons 4
console framework.
It does not provide direct device driver entry points
but makes its functions available via the internal
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface.
.Sh DISPLAY RESOLUTION
If the
.Nm
frame buffer is used as the console display, it is possible, for some models,
to select a different resolution than the default 1152x900 or 1024x768
by changing the OpenPROM environment.
To change the default resolution, type the following:
.Pp
.Em \   ok
setenv
.Em output-device
screen:r1152x900x66
.Pp
to change to a 66Hz 1152x900 resolution.
.Pp
If the
.Nm
frame buffer is a secondary display, or a serial console is used, the
display resolution cannot be changed without using an
.Em nvramrc
OpenPROM script.
Refer to the
.Em Sun Frame Buffer FAQ
for details.
.Pp
The
.Nm
frame buffer accepts the following resolutions:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width screen:r1280x1024x76 -compact
.It screen:r1024x768x77
Super VGA 1024x768, with a refresh rate of 77Hz.
This is the default setting on model 501-2691.
.It screen:r1152x900x66
Standard 1152x900, with a refresh rate of 66Hz.
This is the default setting on older models (501-1415 and 501-8044).
.It screen:r1152x900x76
Standard 1152x900, with a refresh rate of 76Hz.
This is the default setting on more recent models (501-1718 and 501-1909).
.El
.Pp
Note that not all models support settings other than their default setting.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sbus 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4
.Rs
.%T Sun Frame Buffer FAQ
.%U http://www.sunhelp.org/faq/FrameBuffer.html
.Re
