.\"     $OpenBSD: fhc.4,v 1.11 2018/06/18 06:06:52 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Jason L. Wright (jason@thought.net)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 18 2018 $
.Dt FHC 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fhc
.Nd SPARC64 FireHose controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "fhc* at central?"
.Cd "fhc* at mainbus0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device provides support for the
FireHose controllers
found on Sunfire, Starfire, and Wildfire
UltraSPARC systems.
These devices are used for board level
functions on these systems.
This device also controls an LED for each slot.
This LED can be made to blink based on the load average on most systems
by setting the
.Xr sysctl 2
variable
.Ar machdep.led_blink
to a non-zero value.
.Sh HARDWARE
.Ox
includes the following
.Nm
drivers, sorted by driver name:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width environ(4) -offset ind -compact
.It Xr clkbrd 4
SPARC64 Clock Board
.It Xr clock 4
real-time clock
.It Xr environ 4
SPARC64 temperature sensor
.It Xr zs 4
Zilog 8530 (ZSCC) serial communications driver
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysctl 2 ,
.Xr central 4 ,
.Xr intro 4
.Sh HISTORY
.Ox
support for the
.Nm
first appeared in
.Ox 3.7 .
