.\"	$OpenBSD: le.4,v 1.17 2015/11/21 08:04:20 jmc Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by the Computer Systems Engineering group
.\" at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory under DARPA contract BG 91-66 and
.\" contributed to Berkeley.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: Header: le.4,v 1.2 92/10/13 05:31:33 leres Exp
.\"	from: @(#)le.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 21 2015 $
.Dt LE 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm le ,
.Nm ledma ,
.Nm lebuffer
.Nd AMD LANCE Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ledma* at sbus?          " Pq onboard
.Cd "le* at ledma*            " Pq onboard
.Cd "le* at sbus?             " Pq SBus
.Cd "lebuffer* at sbus?       " Pq SBus
.Cd "le* at lebuffer?         " Pq SBus
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface provides access to the 10 Mb/s
.Tn Ethernet
network via the
.Tn AMD
Am7990
Local Area Network Controller for Ethernet
.Pq Tn LANCE
chip set.
.Pp
Different cards and machines have different kinds of connectors,
as follows:
.Bl -tag -width "media autoselect"
.It AUI/DIX
Standard 15 pin connector
.It 10BaseT
UTP, also known as twisted pair
.El
.Pp
By default, the system will select the media type automatically, but the
.Xr ifconfig 8
command can be used to force the media selection.
The media types are shown below:
.Bl -tag -width "media autoselect"
.It media autoselect
Attempt to autoselect the media type (default)
.It media 10base5
Use the AUI connector
.It media 10baseT
Use the twisted pair connector
.El
.Sh NOTES
Some SBus models, in particular the 501-1450 and 501-1881, have dip
switches which must be changed to select between the BNC and AUI modes.
For BNC, set 1-6 ON, 7-8 OFF; for AUI set 1-6 OFF, and 7-8 ON.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr sbus 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
.Ox
support for the
.Nm
first appeared in
.Ox 3.0 .
