.\"     $OpenBSD: lom.4,v 1.5 2013/07/16 16:05:50 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Mark Kettenis <kettenis@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt LOM 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lom
.Nd lights out management
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "lom* at ebus?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the LOMlite lights out management module
found on Sun Netra t1 systems and the LOMlite2 module found on Sun
Fire V100/V120 and Sun Netra X1 systems.
Temperature readings, PSU status and fan status provided by the LOM
are made available through the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface.
The integrated
.Xr watchdog 4
timer can be configured through the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface as well.
The watchdog timer supports timeouts between 1 and 126 seconds.
If the watchdog is disabled, which is its default state, it will turn
on the system's fault LED after the maximum timeout of 126 seconds.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver will update the hostname stored in the LOM whenever the
system's hostname is changed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hostname 1 ,
.Xr ebus 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mark Kettenis Aq Mt kettenis@openbsd.org .
