.\"	$OpenBSD: mgx.4,v 1.14 2011/12/03 23:01:21 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003, 2005 Miodrag Vallat
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 3 2011 $
.Dt MGX 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mgx
.Nd SMS MGX and MGXPlus accelerated 8/24-bit color frame buffers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "mgx* at sbus?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at mgx?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Tn Southland Media Systems
.Pq now Tn "Quantum 3D"
MGX and MGXPlus are SBus color frame buffers, with graphics acceleration
capabilities.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver interfaces the frame buffer with the
.Xr wscons 4
console framework.
It does not provide direct device driver entry points
but makes its functions available via the internal
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface.
.Sh DISPLAY RESOLUTION
The MGX and MGXPlus frame buffers will adapt their resolution to the monitor
they are connected to.
However, when not connected to a Sun monitor, the device will default to the
.Xr cgthree 4 Ns -compatible
1152x900 resolution, with a refresh rate of 66Hz.
A different resolution can be forced using the set of DIP switches
.Pq sometimes covered by metal foil
located near the SBus connector on the board itself.
.Pp
The DIP switch settings are as follows:
.Bl -column "OFF OFF OFF OFF" "Resolution" "Refresh Rate" "Details"
.It Sy "Switches" Ta Sy "Resolution" Ta Sy "Refresh Rate" Ta Sy "Details"
.It Sy "1   2   3   4" Ta "" Ta "" Ta ""
.\" 0
.It Li "OFF OFF OFF OFF" Ta 1024x768 Ta 77Hz Ta ""
.\" 2
.It Li "OFF ON  OFF OFF" Ta 1280x1024 Ta 76Hz Ta ""
.\" 3 (exactly the same as #7. Not a typo)
.It Li "ON  ON  OFF OFF" Ta 1152x900 Ta 66Hz Ta ""
.\" 4
.It Li "OFF OFF ON  OFF" Ta 1152x900 Ta 76Hz Ta ""
.\" 6
.It Li "OFF ON  ON  OFF" Ta 1152x900 Ta 77Hz Ta ""
.\" 7
.It Li "ON  ON  ON  OFF" Ta 1152x900 Ta 66Hz Ta "cgthree compatible"
.\" 11
.It Li "ON  ON  OFF ON " Ta 1152x900 Ta 66Hz Ta "cgsix compatible"
.\" 12
.It Li "OFF OFF ON  ON " Ta 1280x1024 Ta 67Hz Ta ""
.\" 15
.It Li "ON  ON  ON  ON " Ta probed Ta probed Ta "factory default"
.El
.Pp
All other combinations are unsupported and may damage the hardware.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sbus 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4
.Sh CAVEATS
This driver does not support mode switching at the moment, and
drives the card in PROM-compatible, 8 bit, mode only.
