.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by the Computer Systems Engineering group
.\" at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory under DARPA contract BG 91-66 and
.\" contributed to Berkeley.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)openprom.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"	from: OpenBSD: openprom.4,v 1.9 2004/03/22 22:07:21 miod Exp
.\"
.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Marius Strobl <marius@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 18, 2005
.Dt OPENPROM 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm openprom
.Nd "OPENPROM interface"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/ioctl.h
.In dev/ofw/openpromio.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Pa /dev/openfirm
device is a
.Tn SunOS /
.Tn Solaris
compatible interface to the
.Tn Open Firmware
device tree.
This interface is similar to the
.Xr openprom 4
interface.
It uses
.Xr ioctl 2
calls for all operations.
These calls refer to the nodes in the
.Tn Open Firmware
device tree.
However,
.Fx
only implements a subset of the
.Xr ioctl 2
calls
.Tn SunOS /
.Tn Solaris
does.
The nodes are represented by integer values,
which are simply describing data areas.
Occasionally the number 0 may be used or returned instead,
as described below.
.Pp
All calls use a pointer to a
.Vt "struct openpromio"
descriptor,
which has the following definition:
.Bd -literal
struct openpromio {
	uint32_t	oprom_size;
	char		oprom_array[];
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va oprom_size
member refers to the size of
.Va oprom_array .
The
.Va oprom_array
member actually works like a union.
Depending on the
.Xr ioctl 2
call and whether the
.Vt "struct openpromio"
is used to pass in or return data,
.Va oprom_array
either contains an integer referring to a node or a string referring to a
property name or property value.
The maximum size of
.Va oprom_array
is
.Dv OPROMMAXPARAM .
.Pp
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls are currently implemented:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv OPROMGETPROP"
.It Dv OPROMNEXT
Takes the number of a node and returns the number of the next node in the
.Tn Open Firmware
device tree.
The node following the last node is number 0.
The node following number 0 is the first node.
.It Dv OPROMCHILD
Takes the number of a node and returns the number of the first child of that
node.
This child may have siblings.
These can be determined by using
.Dv OPROMNEXT .
If the node does not have a child,
0 is returned.
.It Dv OPROMGETPROP
Takes the name of a property.
Returns the property value.
The
.Dv OPROMGETPROP
call refers to the node previously returned by either the
.Dv OPROMNEXT
or the
.Dv OPROMCHILD
call,
depending on which one was invoked last.
If the property referenced by the given name is not associated with that node,
.Er EINVAL
is returned.
If the named property exists but has no value,
an empty string is returned.
.It Dv OPROMNXTPROP
Takes the name of a property.
Returns the name of the next property of the node.
As with the
.Dv OPROMGETPROP
call,
the
.Dv OPROMNXTPROP
call refers to the node previously returned by either the
.Dv OPROMNEXT
or the
.Dv OPROMCHILD
call.
If the property referenced by the given name is the last property of the node,
an empty string is returned.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/openprom"
.It Pa /dev/openprom
OPENPROM interface node
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following may result in rejection of an operation:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EBUSY
The
.Pa /dev/openprom
node is already opened.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The given node number is not 0 and does not correspond to any valid node,
or the given node number is 0 where 0 is not allowed,
or the given size value is invalid,
or the given property name exceeds the maximum allowed length of
.Dv OPROMMAXPARAM
bytes.
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
The kernel could not allocate memory to copy in data from user-space or to
retrieve data from the
.Tn Open Firmware .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr openfirm 4 ,
.Xr eeprom 8 ,
.Xr ofwdump 8
.Sh HISTORY
The first
.Fx
version to include the
.Nm
interface was
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
interface was written by
.An Jake Burkholder Aq Mt jake@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
Due to limitations within
.Tn Open Firmware
itself,
these functions run at elevated priority and may adversely affect system
performance.
.Pp
The
.Nm
interface exists entirely for compatibility with software like X11,
and only the features that are actually needed for that are implemented.
The interface sucks too much to actually use,
new code should use the
.Xr openfirm 4
interface instead.
