.\"	$OpenBSD: rfx.4,v 1.12 2015/09/10 15:53:26 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Miodrag Vallat.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 10 2015 $
.Dt RFX 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rfx
.Nd Vitec/Connectware/AP&D RasterFlex framebuffer series
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "rfx* at sbus?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at rfx?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The RasterFlex
series, originally manufactured by Vitec, later bought by Connectware,
then by Advanced Products & Design, are high-performance frame buffers
and frame grabber devices.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver only supports the RasterFlex frame buffers:
.Bl -tag -width RasterFLEX-HR -offset indent -compact
.It RasterFlex-24
.It RasterFlex-32
.It RasterFlex-HR
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver interfaces the frame buffer with the
.Xr wscons 4
console framework.
It does not provide direct device driver entry points
but makes its functions available via the internal
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface.
.Sh DISPLAY RESOLUTION
The RasterFlex
frame buffers will adapt their resolution to the monitor they are
connected to.
However, when not connected to a Sun
monitor, the device will default to the 1152x900 resolution, with a refresh
rate of 66Hz.
A different resolution can be forced using the jumpers J2 to J4, located
near the video connector on the board itself.
.Pp
In the following tables, left
.Pq L
and right
.Pq R
jumper positions are described looking at the board with the video connector
on top.
If the jumper position is not specified
.Pq _ ,
it means it has to be removed
.Pq open .
.Ss RasterFlex-24 and RasterFlex-32 Jumper Settings:
.Bl -column "J2 J3 J4" "Resolution" "Refresh Rate" "Description" -offset indent
.It Sy "J2 J3 J4" Ta Sy "Resolution" Ta Sy "Refresh Rate" Ta Sy "Description"
.It Li "\ \&R \ \&R \ \&R" Ta 1152x900 Ta 66Hz Ta "Automatic Configuration"
.It Li "L  L  L " Ta 1024x768 Ta 76Hz Ta "SVGA"
.It Li "L  _  _ " Ta 1152x900 Ta 66Hz Ta ""
.It Li "_  L  L " Ta 1152x900 Ta 76Hz Ta ""
.El
.Ss RasterFlex-HR Jumper Settings:
.Bl -column "J2 J3 J4" "Resolution" "Refresh Rate" "Description" -offset indent
.It Sy "J2 J3 J4" Ta Sy "Resolution" Ta Sy "Refresh Rate" Ta Sy "Description"
.It Li "\ \&R \ \&R \ \&R" Ta 1152x900 Ta 66Hz Ta "Automatic Configuration"
.It Li "L  L  L " Ta 1024x768 Ta 76Hz Ta "SVGA"
.It Li "L  _  _ " Ta 1152x900 Ta 66Hz Ta ""
.It Li "L  L  _ " Ta 1152x900 Ta 76Hz Ta ""
.It Li "_  L  _ " Ta 1280x1024 Ta 60Hz Ta ""
.It Li "_  L  L " Ta 1280x1024 Ta 67Hz Ta ""
.It Li "L  _  L " Ta 1280x1024 Ta 76Hz Ta ""
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sbus 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4
.Sh CAVEATS
This driver does not support any acceleration features at the moment, and
drives the card in PROM-compatible, 8 bit, mode only.
