.\"	$OpenBSD: sab.4,v 1.9 2015/11/21 08:04:20 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Jason L. Wright (jason@thought.net)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 21 2015 $
.Dt SAB 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sab ,
.Nm sabtty
.Nd Infineon SAB82532 (ESCC2) serial communications driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "sab* at ebus?"
.Cd "sabtty* at sab?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is an
.Tn Infineon
(formerly
.Tn Siemens )
SAB82532 (ESCC2) serial interface chip used in PCI-based UltraSPARC
.Tn Sun
workstations.
The ESCC2 provides two independent input/output channels per instance.
These chips are normally used to provide RS-423 and RS232 serial ports
for general purpose use.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports all of the standard
.Xr tty 4
ioctl calls.
The status of the DTR, RTS, CTS, and DCD signals can be queried with
TIOCMGET command, but, due to limitations in the hardware,
only the DTR and RTS signals can be modified with TIOCMSET, TIOCMBIC,
and TIOCMBIS
.Xr ioctl 2
commands.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/ttyh[0-1] -compact
.It /dev/ttyh[0-1]
Serial ports
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr ebus 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr tty 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.1 .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
does not support cua minor devices.
