.\"	$OpenBSD: tvtwo.4,v 1.11 2011/12/03 23:01:21 schwarze Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Miodrag Vallat.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 3 2011 $
.Dt TVTWO 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tvtwo
.Nd accelerated 24-bit color frame buffer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "tvtwo* at sbus?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at tvtwo?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Parallax XVideo and PowerVideo frame buffers, also known as
.Sq tvtwo ,
are memory based color frame buffers, with graphics acceleration
and overlay capabilities, and hardware MPEG decoding.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver interfaces the frame buffer to the
.Xr wscons 4
console framework.
It does not provide direct device driver entry points
but makes its functions available via the internal
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface.
.Sh DISPLAY RESOLUTION
The XVideo and PowerVideo frame buffers will adapt their resolution and
refresh rate to the monitor they are connected to.
However, when not connected to a Sun monitor, the device will default to the
.Xr cgthree 4 Ns -compatible
1152x900 resolution, with a refresh rate of 67Hz.
A different resolution can be forced using the rotary switch on the edge
of the board.
.Pp
The available modes are as follows:
.Bl -column "Rotary" "Resolution" "Refresh Rate" -offset indent
.It Sy Rotary Ta Sy Resolution Ta Sy "Refresh Rate"
.It Li 0 Ta autodetect Ta autodetect
.It Li 1 Ta 1152x900 Ta 67Hz
.It Li 2 Ta 1152x900 Ta 76Hz
.It Li 3 Ta 1152x900 Ta 60Hz
.It Li 4 Ta 1024x768 Ta 77Hz
.It Li 5 Ta 640x480 Ta 60Hz
.El
.Pp
All other rotary positions will behave as position 0, except for positions
E and F.
Position E enables the board built-in debugger on the serial port, and
should not be used by end-users.
Position F selects the video mode settings stored in the cards NVRAM.
These settings cannot be modified under
.Ox .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sbus 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4
.Sh CAVEATS
This driver does not support any acceleration features at the moment.
