.\"     $OpenBSD: vds.4,v 1.6 2015/11/21 08:04:20 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Mark Kettenis <kettenis@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 21 2015 $
.Dt VDS 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vds ,
.Nm vdsp
.Nd virtual disk server
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "vds* at cbus?"
.Cd "vdsp* at vds?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides a virtual disk server using the services provided by
the UltraSPARC Hypervisor as found on sun4v systems.
It provides the backing storage for virtual disks in other logical
domains through a logical domain channel provided by the UltraSPARC
Hypervisor.
The
.Nm
driver uses block devices or disk images in the form of regular files.
The name of the block device or file used for the disk image is taken from the
domain's machine description.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports version 1.0 and version 1.1 of the vDisk protocol.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cbus 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr vdsk 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mark Kettenis Aq Mt kettenis@openbsd.org .
