.\"	$OpenBSD: zs.4,v 1.18 2015/11/21 08:04:21 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998, 2002 The OpenBSD Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 21 2015 $
.Dt ZS 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zs ,
.Nm zstty ,
.Nm zskbd ,
.Nm zsms
.Nd Zilog 8530 (ZSCC) serial communications driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "zs* at fhc?"
.Cd "zs* at sbus?"
.Cd "zstty* at zs?"
.Cd "zskbd* at zs?"
.Cd "wskbd* at zskbd?"
.Cd "zsms* at zs?"
.Cd "wsmouse* at zsms?"
.Cd "option SUNKBD_LAYOUT=XXX"
.Cd "option SUNKBD5_LAYOUT=XXX"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is a Zilog 8530 serial interface chip used in SBus-based UltraSPARC
.Tn Sun
workstations.
The Zilog 8530 provides two input/output channels per instance.
Most
.Tn Sun
workstations include two of these interfaces.
One of the interfaces is usually hardwired for use by the keyboard and mouse
attached to the workstation console.
The
.Nm zskbd
devices connect keyboard devices to the generic keyboard driver
.Nm wskbd .
The
.Nm zsms
devices connect mice to the generic mouse driver
.Xr wsmouse 4 .
The remaining additional
.Nm zs
interfaces provide RS-423
and RS-232 serial ports for general purpose use.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports all of the standard
.Xr tty 4
ioctl calls.
The status of the DTR, RTS, CTS, and DCD signals can be queried with
TIOCMGET command, but, due to limitations in the hardware,
only the DTR and RTS signals can be modified with TIOCMSET, TIOCMBIC,
and TIOCMBIS
.Xr ioctl 2
commands.
.Pp
The
.Nm zskbd
driver supports a number of different key mappings.
By default, the layout corresponding to the keyboard model
as probed by the
.Nm zskbd
driver will be used.
A different layout can be chosen either with the kernel options
.Dq SUNKBD_LAYOUT
(for type 4 keyboards)
and
.Dq SUNKBD5_LAYOUT
(for type 5 keyboards)
at compile time or with the utility
.Xr wsconsctl 8
(variable:
.Dq keyboard.encoding )
at runtime.
.Pp
Other mappings can be used if the whole keymap is replaced by means of
.Xr wsconsctl 8 .
The built-in mappings are at this time:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It KB_BE
.Pq be
Belgium French (type 4 only).
.It KB_DE
.Pq de
German.
.It KB_DK
.Pq dk
Danish.
.It KB_ES
.Pq es
Spanish.
.It KB_FR
.Pq fr
French (type 5 only).
.It KB_IT
.Pq it
Italian.
.It KB_JP
.Pq jp
Japanese (type 5 only).
.It KB_NL
.Pq \&nl
Dutch.
.It KB_NO
.Pq no
Norwegian.
.It KB_PT
.Pq pt
Portuguese.
.It KB_SF
.Pq sf
Swiss French.
.It KB_SG
.Pq sg
Swiss German.
.It KB_SV
.Pq sv
Swedish with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_UK
.Pq uk
British.
.It KB_US
.Pq us
English/US keyboard mapping.
.El
.Pp
The KB_SV mapping can be used in
the KB_NODEAD
.Pq .nodead
variant.
This switches off the
.Dq dead accents .
.Sh EXAMPLES
To set a German keyboard layout, use
.Ic wsconsctl keyboard.encoding=de .
To set it at kernel build time, add
the following to the kernel configuration file for a type 4 keyboard:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
option SUNKBD_LAYOUT="KB_DE"
.Ed
.Pp
For a type 5 keyboard:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
option SUNKBD5_LAYOUT="KB_DE"
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr fhc 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sbus 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr wskbd 4 ,
.Xr wsmouse 4 ,
.Xr wsconsctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Bx 4.4 .
Support for the TIOCM*
.Xr ioctl 2 Ns s
appeared in
.Ox 2.3 .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver now supports cua minor devices, but with this known deficiency
in the simultaneous outgoing/incoming aspect of the driver:
The first outgoing connection succeeds, but second and subsequent
connections fail, apparently due to a getty hang.
The hung getty apparently prevents the cua device from being re-opened.
.Pp
The kernel does not provide a keyboard layout for all manufactured
.Tn Sun
keyboard models.
