.\" $OpenBSD: cnmac.4,v 1.11 2021/02/06 09:33:41 visa Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Visa Hankala
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 6 2021 $
.Dt CNMAC 4 octeon
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cnmac
.Nd Cavium OCTEON built-in Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "cnmac* at octgmx?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports built-in Ethernet ports on Cavium OCTEON CN30xx,
Cavium OCTEON Plus CN50xx, Cavium OCTEON II CN61xx, and
Cavium OCTEON III CN71xx system on chips.
Among the routers based on these chips are the following:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
D-Link DSR-500
.It
Netgear ProSecure UTM25
.It
Portwell CAM-0100
.It
Rhino Labs Inc. SDNA Shasta
.It
Rhino Labs Inc. SDNA-7130
.It
Ubiquiti Networks EdgeRouter
.It
Ubiquiti Networks EdgeRouter 4
.It
Ubiquiti Networks EdgeRouter 6
.It
Ubiquiti Networks EdgeRouter LITE
.It
Ubiquiti Networks EdgeRouter PoE
.It
Ubiquiti Networks EdgeRouter PRO
.It
Ubiquiti Networks UniFi Security Gateway
.It
Ubiquiti Networks UniFi Security Gateway PRO-4
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports TCP/UDP checksum offload on IPv4/IPv6 reception and
transmission, and IPv4 checksum offload on reception.
The driver additionally supports jumbo frames.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr octgmx 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 5.4 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Internet Initiative Japan Inc .
