.\"	$OpenBSD: octpcie.4,v 1.2 2019/10/07 14:59:59 visa Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Visa Hankala
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: October 7 2019 $
.Dt OCTPCIE 4 octeon
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm octpcie
.Nd OCTEON PCIe controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "octpcie* at iobus?"
.Cd "pci* at octpcie?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the OCTEON PCIe controller found
on OCTEON II and III.
It provides a host interface to the
.Xr pci 4
bus.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "octpcie0 port N: link timeout"
The PCIe link did not establish.
This happens if the PCIe slot is empty.
.It "octpcie0 port N: reset timeout"
The PCIe port failed to reset.
This can happen if the PCIe port has not been wired.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 6.6 .
