.\"	$OpenBSD: boot_sparc64.8,v 1.18 2022/09/05 10:29:28 kn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)boot_sparc.8	8.2 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 5 2022 $
.Dt BOOT_SPARC64 8 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm boot_sparc64
.Nd sparc64 system bootstrapping procedures
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss System starts
When powered on, after a panic, or if the system is rebooted via
.Xr reboot 8
or
.Xr shutdown 8 ,
the PROM will proceed to its initialization, and will boot an operating
system if autoboot is enabled.
.Ss Boot process description
The sparc64 boot process is split into two parts: a small first-stage bootblock
that is written into the superblock area of a partition
.Po
and hence is limited in size to SBSIZE - DEV_BSIZE bytes
.Pc ,
and a second-stage boot program that resides in the filesystem proper.
The first-stage bootblock is loaded into memory by the PROM.
After it receives control, it loads the second-stage boot program
.Sy ofwboot
from the filesystem.
The second-stage boot program uses the device driver interface to
the PROM and the stand-alone filesystem code in
.Pa libsa.a
to locate and load the kernel.
The first-stage bootblock and second-stage boot program can be found in
.Pa /usr/mdec/bootblk
and
.Pa /usr/mdec/ofwboot
respectively.
The second-stage boot program commonly resides in the root directory as
.Pa /ofwboot .
.Pp
The boot program attempts to load the kernel from the selected
boot device, which must currently be an SCSI
.Pq Pa sd
or IDE
.Pq Pa wd
disk drive, or a CD-ROM
.Pq Pa cd ,
or an SCSI tape drive
.Pq Pa st .
.Pp
The UltraSPARC Open Firmware
will normally look for a bootloader on the device specified by the
.Va boot-device
variable.
The
.Ox
bootloader will then look for a kernel named
.Pa bsd
by default, unless the
.Va boot-file
variable contains a filename, or a different filename has been specified
in the boot command.
To reset this variable to its default, empty, value, type the following:
.Pp
.D1 Sy ok Li set-default boot-file
.Pp
Autoboot is enabled by setting the
.Va auto-boot?\&
variable to
.Dq true ,
and is the factory default.
.Ss Boot process options
The following options are recognized:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "-XXX" -offset indent -compact
.It Fl a
Prompt for the root filesystem and swap devices after the devices have
been configured.
.It Fl c
Enter the
.Dq User Kernel Configuration
mode upon startup
.Pq see Xr boot_config 8 .
.It Fl d
Enter the debugger,
.Xr ddb 4 ,
as soon as the kernel console has been initialized.
.It Fl s
Boot the system single-user.
The system will be booted multi-user unless this option is specified.
.El
.Ss Accessing the PROM during runtime
If the
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
.Va ddb.console
is enabled, at any time you can break back to the ROM by pressing the
.Sq L1
.Pq also known as the Dq stop key
and
.Sq a
keys at the same time (if the console is a serial port the same is
achieved by sending a
.Dq break ) ,
and entering
.Ic machine prom
at the prompt.
If you do this accidentally you can continue whatever was in progress
by typing
.Ic go
at the PROM prompt, and then
.Ic cont
to return to the system.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/mdec/ofwboot.net -compact
.It Pa /bsd
default system kernel
.It Pa /bsd.rd
standalone installation kernel, suitable for disaster recovery
.It Pa /usr/mdec/bootblk
primary bootstrap for
.Dq ffs
file system
.It Pa /usr/mdec/ofwboot
secondary bootstrap (usually also installed as
.Pa /ofwboot )
.It Pa /usr/mdec/ofwboot.net
network bootstrap
.It Pa /usr/mdec/ofwbootfd
floppy disk bootstrap
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ddb 4 ,
.Xr softraid 4 ,
.Xr boot_config 8 ,
.Xr halt 8 ,
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr installboot 8 ,
.Xr reboot 8 ,
.Xr savecore 8 ,
.Xr shutdown 8
