.\" $OpenBSD: tls_ocsp_process_response.3,v 1.7 2025/07/07 10:54:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Bob Beck <beck@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 7 2025 $
.Dt TLS_OCSP_PROCESS_RESPONSE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tls_ocsp_process_response ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_url ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_response_status ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_cert_status ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_crl_reason ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_result ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_revocation_time ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_this_update ,
.Nm tls_peer_ocsp_next_update
.Nd inspect an OCSP response
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libtls libssl libcrypto
.In tls.h
.Ft int
.Fo tls_ocsp_process_response
.Fa "struct tls *ctx"
.Fa "const unsigned char *response"
.Fa "size_t size"
.Fc
.Ft const char *
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_url "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft int
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_response_status "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft int
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_cert_status "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft int
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_crl_reason "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft const char *
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_result "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft time_t
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_revocation_time "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft time_t
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_this_update "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft time_t
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_next_update "struct tls *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn tls_ocsp_process_response
processes a raw OCSP response in
.Ar response
of size
.Ar size
to check the revocation status of the peer certificate from
.Ar ctx .
A successful return code of 0 indicates that the certificate
has not been revoked.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_url
returns the URL for OCSP validation of the peer certificate from
.Ar ctx .
.Pp
The following functions return information about the peer certificate from
.Ar ctx
that was obtained by validating a stapled OCSP response during the handshake,
or via a previous call to
.Fn tls_ocsp_process_response .
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_response_status
returns the OCSP response status as per RFC 6960 section 2.3.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_cert_status
returns the OCSP certificate status code as per RFC 6960 section 2.2.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_crl_reason
returns the OCSP certificate revocation reason status code as per RFC 5280
section 5.3.1.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_result
returns a textual representation of the OCSP status code
returned by one of the previous three functions.
If the OCSP response was valid and the certificate was not
revoked, the string indicates the OCSP certificate status.
Otherwise, the string indicates
the OCSP certificate revocation reason or the OCSP error.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_revocation_time
returns the OCSP revocation time.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_this_update
returns the OCSP this update time.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_next_update
returns the OCSP next update time.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn tls_ocsp_process_response
returns 0 on success or -1 on error.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_url
and
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_result
return
.Dv NULL
on error or an out of memory condition.
.Pp
The
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_response_status
function returns one of
.Dv TLS_OCSP_RESPONSE_SUCCESSFUL ,
.Dv TLS_OCSP_RESPONSE_MALFORMED ,
.Dv TLS_OCSP_RESPONSE_INTERNALERROR ,
.Dv TLS_OCSP_RESPONSE_TRYLATER ,
.Dv TLS_OCSP_RESPONSE_SIGREQUIRED ,
or
.Dv TLS_OCSP_RESPONSE_UNAUTHORIZED
on success or -1 on error.
.Pp
The
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_cert_status
function returns one of
.Dv TLS_OCSP_CERT_GOOD ,
.Dv TLS_OCSP_CERT_REVOKED ,
or
.Dv TLS_OCSP_CERT_UNKNOWN
on success, and -1 on error.
.Pp
The
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_crl_reason
function returns one of
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_UNSPECIFIED ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_KEY_COMPROMISE ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_CA_COMPROMISE ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_AFFILIATION_CHANGED ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_SUPERSEDED ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_CESSATION_OF_OPERATION ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_CERTIFICATE_HOLD ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_REMOVE_FROM_CRL ,
.Dv TLS_CRL_REASON_PRIVILEGE_WITHDRAWN ,
or
.Dv  TLS_CRL_REASON_AA_COMPROMISE
on success or -1 on error.
.Pp
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_revocation_time ,
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_this_update ,
and
.Fn tls_peer_ocsp_next_update
return a time in epoch-seconds on success or -1 on error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tls_client 3 ,
.Xr tls_config_ocsp_require_stapling 3 ,
.Xr tls_conn_version 3 ,
.Xr tls_connect 3 ,
.Xr tls_handshake 3 ,
.Xr tls_init 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions appeared in
.Ox 6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Bob Beck Aq Mt beck@openbsd.org
.An Marko Kreen Aq Mt markokr@gmail.com
