.\" $OpenBSD: tls_config_verify.3,v 1.5 2025/07/07 10:54:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Ted Unangst <tedu@openbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Joel Sing <jsing@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 7 2025 $
.Dt TLS_CONFIG_VERIFY 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tls_config_verify ,
.Nm tls_config_insecure_noverifycert ,
.Nm tls_config_insecure_noverifyname ,
.Nm tls_config_insecure_noverifytime
.Nd insecure TLS configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libtls libssl libcrypto
.In tls.h
.Ft void
.Fn tls_config_verify "struct tls_config *config"
.Ft void
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifycert "struct tls_config *config"
.Ft void
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifyname "struct tls_config *config"
.Ft void
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifytime "struct tls_config *config"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions disable parts of the normal certificate verification
process, resulting in insecure configurations.
Be very careful when using them.
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifycert
disables certificate verification and OCSP validation.
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifyname
disables server name verification (client only).
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifytime
disables validity checking of certificates and OCSP validation.
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_verify
reenables server name and certificate verification.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tls_client 3 ,
.Xr tls_config_ocsp_require_stapling 3 ,
.Xr tls_config_set_protocols 3 ,
.Xr tls_conn_version 3 ,
.Xr tls_connect 3 ,
.Xr tls_handshake 3 ,
.Xr tls_init 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn tls_config_verify
appeared in
.Ox 5.6
and got its final name in
.Ox 5.7 .
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifycert
and
.Fn tls_config_insecure_noverifyname
appeared in
.Ox 5.7
and
.Nm tls_config_insecure_noverifytime
in
.Ox 5.9 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Joel Sing Aq Mt jsing@openbsd.org
.An Ted Unangst Aq Mt tedu@openbsd.org
