.\" $OpenBSD: tls_client.3,v 1.5 2025/07/07 10:54:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Ted Unangst <tedu@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 7 2025 $
.Dt TLS_CLIENT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tls_client ,
.Nm tls_server ,
.Nm tls_configure ,
.Nm tls_reset ,
.Nm tls_free
.Nd configure a TLS connection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libtls libssl libcrypto
.In tls.h
.Ft struct tls *
.Fn tls_client void
.Ft struct tls *
.Fn tls_server void
.Ft int
.Fo tls_configure
.Fa "struct tls *ctx"
.Fa "struct tls_config *config"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn tls_free "struct tls *ctx"
.Ft void
.Fn tls_reset "struct tls *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A TLS connection is represented as a
.Vt struct tls
object called a
.Dq context .
A new context is created by either the
.Fn tls_client
or
.Fn tls_server
functions.
.Fn tls_client
is used in TLS client programs,
.Fn tls_server
in TLS server programs.
.Pp
The context can then be configured with the function
.Fn tls_configure .
The same
.Vt tls_config
object can be used to configure multiple contexts.
.Pp
After configuration,
.Xr tls_connect 3
can be called on objects created with
.Fn tls_client ,
and
.Xr tls_accept_socket 3
on objects created with
.Fn tls_server .
.Pp
After use, a TLS context should be closed with
.Xr tls_close 3 ,
and then freed by calling
.Fn tls_free .
If
.Fn tls_free
is called with an argument of
.Dv NULL ,
no action occurs.
.Pp
A TLS context can be reset by calling
.Fn tls_reset ,
allowing for it to be reused.
This is essentially equivalent to calling
.Fn tls_free ,
followed by a call to the same function that was used to originally allocate
the TLS context.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn tls_client
and
.Fn tls_server
return
.Dv NULL
on error or an out of memory condition.
.Pp
.Fn tls_configure
returns 0 on success or -1 on error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tls_accept_socket 3 ,
.Xr tls_config_new 3 ,
.Xr tls_connect 3 ,
.Xr tls_init 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions appeared in
.Ox 5.6
and got their final names in
.Ox 5.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Joel Sing Aq Mt jsing@openbsd.org
