.\" $OpenBSD: tls_config_set_session_id.3,v 1.6 2025/07/07 10:54:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Claudio Jeker <claudio@openbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Joel Sing <jsing@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 7 2025 $
.Dt TLS_CONFIG_SET_SESSION_ID 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tls_config_set_session_fd ,
.Nm tls_config_set_session_id ,
.Nm tls_config_set_session_lifetime ,
.Nm tls_config_add_ticket_key
.Nd configure resuming of TLS handshakes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libtls libssl libcrypto
.In tls.h
.Ft int
.Fo tls_config_set_session_fd
.Fa "struct tls_config *config"
.Fa "int session_fd"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo tls_config_set_session_id
.Fa "struct tls_config *config"
.Fa "const unsigned char *session_id"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo tls_config_set_session_lifetime
.Fa "struct tls_config *config"
.Fa "int lifetime"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo tls_config_add_ticket_key
.Fa "struct tls_config *config"
.Fa "uint32_t keyrev"
.Fa "unsigned char *key"
.Fa "size_t keylen"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn tls_config_set_session_fd
sets a file descriptor to be used to manage data for TLS sessions (client only).
The given file descriptor must be a regular file and be owned by the current
user, with permissions being restricted to only allow the owner to read and
write the file (0600).
If the file has a non-zero length, the client will attempt to read session
data from this file and resume the previous TLS session with the server.
Upon a successful handshake the file will be updated with current session
data, if available.
The caller is responsible for closing this file descriptor, after all TLS
contexts that have been configured to use it have been freed via
.Fn tls_free .
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_set_session_id
sets the session identifier that will be used by the TLS server when
sessions are enabled (server only).
By default a random value is used.
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_set_session_lifetime
sets the lifetime to be used for TLS sessions (server only).
Session support is disabled if a lifetime of zero is specified, which is the
default.
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_add_ticket_key
adds a key used for the encryption and authentication of TLS tickets
(server only).
By default keys are generated and rotated automatically based on their lifetime.
This function should only be used to synchronise ticket encryption key across
multiple processes.
Re-adding a known key will result in an error, unless it is the most recently
added key.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return 0 on success or -1 on error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tls_accept_socket 3 ,
.Xr tls_config_set_protocols 3 ,
.Xr tls_init 3 ,
.Xr tls_load_file 3 ,
.Xr tls_server 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn tls_config_set_session_id ,
.Fn tls_config_set_session_lifetime
and
.Fn tls_config_add_ticket_key
appeared in
.Ox 6.1 .
.Pp
.Fn tls_config_set_session_fd
appeared in
.Ox 6.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Claudio Jeker Aq Mt claudio@openbsd.org
.An Joel Sing Aq Mt jsing@openbsd.org
