.\"	$OpenBSD: feclearexcept.3,v 1.8 2025/06/07 10:33:06 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Martynas Venckus <martynas@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 7 2025 $
.Dt FECLEAREXCEPT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm feclearexcept ,
.Nm fegetexceptflag ,
.Nm feraiseexcept ,
.Nm fesetexceptflag ,
.Nm fetestexcept
.Nd access floating-point status flags
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libm
.In fenv.h
.Ft int
.Fn feclearexcept "int excepts"
.Ft int
.Fn fegetexceptflag "fexcept_t *flagp" "int excepts"
.Ft int
.Fn feraiseexcept "int excepts"
.Ft int
.Fn fesetexceptflag "const fexcept_t *flagp" "int excepts"
.Ft int
.Fn fetestexcept "int excepts"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions provide access to the floating-point status flags.
The
.Fa excepts
input argument is a bitmask specifying an exception type and
containing any of the values listed below.
.Bl -tag -width "FE_DIVBYZERO"
.It Dv FE_DIVBYZERO
A divide-by-zero exception occurs when the program attempts to
divide a finite non-zero number by zero.
.It Dv FE_INEXACT
An inexact exception is raised whenever there is a loss of precision
due to rounding.
.It Dv FE_INVALID
Invalid operation exceptions occur when a program attempts to
perform calculations for which there is no reasonable representable
answer.
.Pp
For instance, subtraction of infinities, division of zero by zero,
ordered comparison involving NaNs, and taking the square root of a
negative number are all invalid operations.
.It Dv FE_OVERFLOW
An overflow exception occurs when the magnitude of the result of a
computation is too large to fit in the destination type.
.It Dv FE_UNDERFLOW
Underflow occurs when the result of a computation is too close to zero
to be represented as a non-zero value in the destination type.
.It Dv FE_DENORMAL
Denormalization exception occurs when the result of a floating-point
expression is a denormalized number.
.Pp
This is available only on the floating-point implementations of
amd64 and i386 processors.
.El
.Pp
Additionally, the macro
.Dv FE_ALL_EXCEPT
is simply the bitwise OR of all floating-point exception macros
listed above.
.Pp
The
.Fn feclearexcept
function clears the floating-point exceptions represented by
.Fa excepts .
.Pp
The
.Fn fegetexceptflag
function stores a representation of the states of the floating-point
flags indicated by
.Pa excepts
in the object pointed to by
.Pa flagp .
.Pp
The
.Fn feraiseexcept
function raises floating-point exceptions represented by
.Pa excepts .
.Pp
The
.Fn fesetexceptflag
function sets the floating-point status flags indicated by
.Pa excepts
to the states stored in the object pointed to by
.Pa flagp .
The value of
.Pa flagp
shall have been set by a previous call to
.Fn fegetexceptflag
whose second argument represented at least those floating-point
exceptions represented by
.Pa excepts .
This function does not raise floating-point exceptions, but only
sets the state of the flags.
.Pp
The
.Fn fetestexcept
function determines which of a specified subset of the floating-point
exception flags are currently set.
The
.Pa excepts
specifies the floating-point status flags to be queried.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn feclearexcept ,
.Fn fegetexceptflag ,
.Fn feraiseexcept ,
and
.Fn fesetexceptflag
functions return zero on success, and non-zero if an error occurred.
The
.Fn fetestexcept
function returns a bitmask of a specified subset of the floating-point
exception flags which are currently set.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr feenableexcept 3 ,
.Xr fegetenv 3 ,
.Xr fegetround 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn feclearexcept ,
.Fn fegetexceptflag ,
.Fn feraiseexcept ,
.Fn fesetexceptflag ,
and
.Fn fetestexcept
functions conform to
.St -isoC-99 .
.Pp
The return types for
.Fn feclearexcept ,
.Fn fegetexceptflag ,
.Fn feraiseexcept ,
and
.Fn fesetexceptflag
are
.Vt int
for alignment with
.St -isoC-99
Defect Report #202.
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in
.Ox 5.0 .
.Sh CAVEATS
On some architectures,
.Fn feraiseexcept
additionally raises the
.Dq inexact
floating-point exception whenever it raises the
.Dq overflow
or
.Dq underflow
floating-point exception.
