.\" Copyright (c) 2004 David Schultz <das@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 8, 2004
.Dt FEGETROUND 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fegetround ,
.Nm fesetround
.Nd floating-point rounding control
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libm
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In fenv.h
.Fd "#pragma STDC FENV_ACCESS ON"
.Ft int
.Fn fegetround void
.Ft int
.Fn fesetround "int round"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fegetround
function determines the current floating-point rounding mode,
and the
.Fn fesetround
function sets the current rounding mode to
.Fa round .
The rounding mode is one of
.Dv FE_TONEAREST , FE_DOWNWARD , FE_UPWARD ,
or
.Dv FE_TOWARDZERO ,
as described in
.Xr fenv 3 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn fegetround
routine returns the current rounding mode.
The
.Fn fesetround
function returns 0 on success and non-zero otherwise;
however, the present implementation always succeeds.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fenv 3 ,
.Xr fpgetround 3 ,
.Xr fpsetround 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn fegetround
and
.Fn fesetround
functions conform to
.St -isoC-99 .
.Sh HISTORY
These routines first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
They supersede the non-standard
.Xr fpgetround 3
and
.Xr fpsetround 3
functions.
