.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)lgamma.3	6.6 (Berkeley) 12/3/92
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 8, 2017
.Dt LGAMMA 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lgamma ,
.Nm lgamma_r ,
.Nm lgammaf ,
.Nm lgammaf_r ,
.Nm lgammal ,
.Nm lgammal_r ,
.Nm gamma ,
.Nm gamma_r ,
.Nm gammaf ,
.Nm gammaf_r ,
.Nm tgamma ,
.Nm tgammaf ,
.Nm tgammal ,
.Nd log gamma functions, gamma function
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libm
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In math.h
.Ft extern int
.Fa signgam ;
.sp
.Ft double
.Fn lgamma "double x"
.Ft double
.Fn lgamma_r "double x" "int *signgamp"
.Ft float
.Fn lgammaf "float x"
.Ft float
.Fn lgammaf_r "float x" "int *signgamp"
.Ft "long double"
.Fn lgammal "long double x"
.Ft "long double"
.Fn lgammal_r "long double x" "int *signgamp"
.Ft double
.Fn gamma "double x"
.Ft double
.Fn gamma_r "double x" "int *signgamp"
.Ft float
.Fn gammaf "float x"
.Ft float
.Fn gammaf_r "float x" "int *signgamp"
.Ft "long double"
.Fn tgamma "double x"
.Ft float
.Fn tgammaf "float x"
.Ft "long double"
.Fn tgammal "long double x"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn lgamma x ,
.Fn lgammaf x ,
and
.Fn lgammal x
.if t \{\
return ln\||\(*G(x)| where
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
\(*G(x) = \(is\d\s8\z0\s10\u\u\s8\(if\s10\d t\u\s8x\-1\s10\d e\u\s8\-t\s10\d dt	for x > 0 and
\(*G(x) = \(*p/(\(*G(1\-x)\|sin(\(*px))	for x < 1.
.Ed
.\}
.if n \
return ln\||\(*G(x)|.
The external integer
.Fa signgam
returns the sign of \(*G(x).
.Pp
.Fn lgamma_r x signgamp ,
.Fn lgammaf_r x signgamp ,
and
.Fn lgammal_r x signgamp
provide the same functionality as
.Fn lgamma x ,
.Fn lgammaf x ,
and
.Fn lgammal x ,
but the caller must provide an integer to store the sign of \(*G(x).
.Pp
The
.Fn tgamma x ,
.Fn tgammaf x ,
and
.Fn tgammal x
functions return \(*G(x), with no effect on
.Fa signgam .
.Pp
.Fn gamma ,
.Fn gammaf ,
.Fn gamma_r ,
and
.Fn gammaf_r
are deprecated aliases for
.Fn lgamma ,
.Fn lgammaf ,
.Fn lgamma_r ,
and
.Fn lgammaf_r ,
respectively.
.Sh IDIOSYNCRASIES
Do not use the expression
.Dq Li signgam\(**exp(lgamma(x))
to compute g := \(*G(x).
Instead use a program like this (in C):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
lg = lgamma(x); g = signgam\(**exp(lg);
.Ed
.Pp
Only after
.Fn lgamma
or
.Fn lgammaf
has returned can signgam be correct.
.Pp
For arguments in its range,
.Fn tgamma
is preferred, as for positive arguments
it is accurate to within one unit in the last place.
Exponentiation of
.Fn lgamma
will lose up to 10 significant bits.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn gamma ,
.Fn gammaf ,
.Fn gammal ,
.Fn gamma_r ,
.Fn gammaf_r ,
.Fn gammal_r ,
.Fn lgamma ,
.Fn lgammaf ,
.Fn lgammal ,
.Fn lgamma_r ,
.Fn lgammaf_r ,
and
.Fn lgammal_r
return appropriate values unless an argument is out of range.
Overflow will occur for sufficiently large positive values, and
non-positive integers.
For large non-integer negative values,
.Fn tgamma
will underflow.
.Sh BUGS
To conform with newer C/C++ standards, a stub implementation for
.Nm tgammal
was committed to the math library, where
.Nm tgammal
is mapped to
.Nm tgamma .
Thus, the numerical accuracy is at most that of the 53-bit double
precision implementation.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr math 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn lgamma ,
.Fn lgammaf ,
.Fn lgammal ,
.Fn tgamma ,
.Fn tgammaf ,
and
.Fn tgammal
functions are expected to conform to
.St -isoC-99 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn lgamma
function appeared in
.Bx 4.3 .
The
.Fn gamma
function appeared in
.Bx 4.4
as a function which computed \(*G(x).
This version was used in
.Fx 1.1 .
The name
.Fn gamma
was originally dedicated to the
.Fn lgamma
function,
and that usage was restored by switching to Sun's fdlibm in
.Fx 1.1.5 .
The
.Fn tgamma
function appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
