.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"
.TH IPFS 8
.SH NAME
ipfs \- saves and restores information for NAT and state tables.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ipfs
[-nv] -l
.PP
.B ipfs
[-nv] -u
.PP
.B ipfs
[-nv] [
.B \-d
<\fIdirname\fP>
] -R
.PP
.B ipfs
[-nv] [
.B \-d
<\fIdirname\fP>
] -W
.PP
.B ipfs
[-nNSv] [
.B \-f
<\fIfilename\fP>
] -r
.PP
.B ipfs
[-nNSv] [
.B \-f
<\fIfilename\fP>
] -w
.PP
.B ipfs
[-nNSv]
.B \-f
<\fIfilename\fP>
.B \-i
<if1>,<if2>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBipfs\fP allows state information created for NAT entries and rules using
\fIkeep state\fP to be locked (modification prevented) and then saved to disk,
allowing for the system to experience a reboot, followed by the restoration
of that information, resulting in connections not being interrupted.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
Change the default directory used with
.B \-R
and
.B \-W
options for saving state information.
.TP
.B \-n
Don't actually take any action that would affect information stored in
the kernel or on disk.
.TP
.B \-v
Provides a verbose description of what's being done.
.TP
.B \-i <ifname1>,<ifname2>
Change all instances of interface name ifname1 in the state save file to
ifname2.  Useful if you're restoring state information after a hardware
reconfiguration or change.
.TP
.B \-N
Operate on NAT information.
.TP
.B \-S
Operate on filtering state information.
.TP
.B \-u
Unlock state tables in the kernel.
.TP
.B \-l
Lock state tables in the kernel.
.TP
.B \-r
Read information in from the specified file and load it into the
kernel.  This requires the state tables to have already been locked
and does not change the lock once complete.
.TP
.B \-w
Write information out to the specified file and from the kernel.
This requires the state tables to have already been locked
and does not change the lock once complete.
.TP
.B \-R
Restores all saved state information, if any, from two files,
\fIipstate.ipf\fP and \fIipnat.ipf\fP, stored in the \fI/var/db/ipf\fP
directory unless otherwise specified by the
.B \-d
option.  The state tables are locked at the beginning of this
operation and unlocked once complete.
.TP
.B \-W
Saves in-kernel state information, if any, out to two files,
\fIipstate.ipf\fP and \fIipnat.ipf\fP, stored in the \fI/var/db/ipf\fP
directory unless otherwise specified by the
.B \-d
option.  The state tables are locked at the beginning of this
operation and unlocked once complete.
.DT
.SH FILES
/var/db/ipf/ipstate.ipf
.br
/var/db/ipf/ipnat.ipf
.br
/dev/ipl
.br
/dev/ipstate
.br
/dev/ipnat
.SH SEE ALSO
ipf(8), ipl(4), ipmon(8), ipnat(8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.PP
Perhaps the -W and -R operations should set the locking but rather than
undo it, restore it to what it was previously.  Fragment table information
is currently not saved.
.SH BUGS
.PP
If you find any, please send email to me at darrenr@pobox.com
