.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"
.TH IPNAT 8
.SH NAME
ipnat \- user interface to the NAT subsystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ipnat
[
.B \-dhlnrsvCF
]
[
.B \-M core
]
[
.B \-N system
]
.B \-f <\fIfilename\fP>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBipnat\fP opens the filename given (treating "\-" as stdin) and parses the
file for a set of rules which are to be added or removed from the IP NAT.
.PP
Each rule processed by \fBipnat\fP
is added to the kernels internal lists if there are no parsing problems.
Rules are added to the end of the internal lists, matching the order in
which they appear when given to \fBipnat\fP.
.PP
Note that if
\fBipf(8)\fP
is not enabled when NAT is configured, it will be enabled
automatically, as the same kernel facilities are used for
NAT functionality.  In addition, packet forwarding must be
enabled.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-C
delete all entries in the current NAT rule listing (NAT rules)
.TP
.B \-d
Enable printing of some extra debugging information.
.TP
.B \-F
delete all active entries in the current NAT translation table (currently
active NAT mappings)
.TP
.B \-h
Print number of hits for each MAP/Redirect filter.
.TP
.B \-l
Show the list of current NAT table entry mappings.
.TP
.B \-n
This flag (no-change) prevents \fBipf\fP from actually making any ioctl
calls or doing anything which would alter the currently running kernel.
.TP
.B \-p
This flag is used with the \fB-r\fP flag to cause any active NAT
sessions that were created by the rules being removed and that are
currently active to also be removed.
.TP
.B \-r
Remove matching NAT rules rather than add them to the internal lists.
.TP
.B \-s
Retrieve and display NAT statistics.
.TP
.B \-v
Turn verbose mode on.  Displays information relating to rule processing
and active rules/table entries.
.DT
.SH FILES
/dev/ipnat
.br
/usr/share/examples/ipfilter  Directory with examples.
.SH SEE ALSO
ipnat(5), ipf(8), ipfstat(8)
