.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"
.TH IPPOOL 8
.SH NAME
ippool \- user interface to the IPFilter pools
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B ippool
-a [-dnv] [-m <name>] [-o <role>] [-t <type>] [-T ttl] -i <ipaddr>[/<netmask>]
.br
.B ippool
-A [-dnv] [-m <name>] [-o <role>] [-S <seed>] [-t <type>]
.br
.B ippool
-f <file> [-dnuv]
.br
.B ippool
-F [-dv] [-o <role>] [-t <type>]
.br
.B ippool
-l [-dv] [-m <name>] [-t <type>] [-o <role>] [-M <core>] [-N <namelist>]
.br
.B ippool
-r [-dnv] [-m <name>] [-o <role>] [-t <type>] -i <ipaddr>[/<netmask>]
.br
.B ippool
-R [-dnv] [-m <name>] [-o <role>] [-t <type>]
.br
.B ippool
-s [-dtv] [-M <core>] [-N <namelist>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B Ippool
is used to manage information stored in the IP pools subsystem of IPFilter.
Configuration file information may be parsed and loaded into the kernel,
currently configured pools removed or changed as well as inspected.
.PP
The command line options used are broken into two sections: the global
options and the instance specific options.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
Toggle debugging of processing the configuration file.
.TP
.B \-n
This flag (no-change) prevents
.B ippool
from actually making any ioctl
calls or doing anything which would alter the currently running kernel.
.TP
.B \-v
Turn verbose mode on.
.SH COMMAND OPTIONS
.TP
.B -a
Add a new data node to an existing pool in the kernel.
.TP
.B -A
Add a new (empty) pool to the kernel.
.TP
.B -f <file>
Read in IP pool configuration information from the file and load it into
the kernel.
.TP
.B -F
Flush loaded pools from the kernel.
.TP
.B -l
Display a list of pools currently loaded into the kernel.
.TP
.B -r
Remove an existing data node from a pool in the kernel.
.TP
.B -R
Remove an existing pool from within the kernel.
.TP
.B -s
Display IP pool statistical information.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -i <ipaddr>[/<netmask>]
Sets the IP address for the operation being undertaken with an
all-one's mask or, optionally, a specific netmask given in either
the dotted-quad notation or a single integer.
.TP
.B -m <name>
Sets the pool name for the current operation.
.TP
.B -M <core>
Specify an alternative path to /dev/kmem to retrieve statistical information
from.
.TP
.B -N <namelist>
Specify an alternative path to lookup symbol name information from when
retrieving statistical information.
.TP
.B -o <role>
Sets the role with which this pool is to be used.  Currently only
.B ipf,
.B auth
and
.B count
are accepted as arguments to this option.
.TP
.B -S <seed>
Sets the hashing seed to the number specified.  Only for use with
.B hash
type pools.
.TP
.B -t <type>
Sets the type of pool being defined.  Myst be one of
.B tree,
.B hash,
.B group-map.
.TP
.B -T <ttl>
Sets the expiration of the node being added. The timeout is expressed
as a number of seconds.
.B tree,
.B hash,
.B group-map.
.TP
.B -u
When parsing a configuration file, rather than load new pool data into the
kernel, unload it.
.DT
.SH FILES
.br
/dev/iplookup
.br
/etc/ippool.conf
.SH SEE ALSO
ippool(5), ipf(8), ipfstat(8)
