.\" Copyright (c) 2007 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
.\" GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
.\" OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN
.\" IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 2, 2014
.Dt ATF-TEST-PROGRAM 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm atf-test-program
.Nd common interface to ATF test programs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl r Ar resfile
.Op Fl s Ar srcdir
.Op Fl v Ar var1=value1 Op .. Fl v Ar varN=valueN
.Ar test_case
.Nm
.Fl l
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Test programs written using the ATF libraries all share a common user
interface, which is what this manual page describes.
.Em NOTE: There is no binary known as
.Nm ;
.Em what is described in this manual page is the command-line interface
.Em exposed by the atf-c, atf-c++ and atf-sh bindings .
.Pp
In the first synopsis form, the test program will execute the provided
test case and print its results to the standard output, unless otherwise
stated by the
.Fl r
flag.
Optionally, the test case name can be suffixed by
.Sq :cleanup ,
in which case the cleanup routine of the test case will be executed
instead of the test case body; see
.Xr atf-test-case 4 .
Note that the test case is
.Em executed without isolation ,
so it can and probably will create and modify files in the current directory.
To execute test cases in a controller manner, you need a runtime engine
that understands the ATF interface.
The recommended runtime engine is
.Xr kyua 1 .
You should only execute test cases by hand for debugging purposes.
.Pp
In the second synopsis form, the test program will list all available
test cases alongside their meta-data properties in a format that is
machine parseable.
This list is processed by
.Xr kyua 1
to know how to execute the test cases of a given test program.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width XvXvarXvalueXX
.It Fl l
Lists available test cases alongside a brief description for each of them.
.It Fl r Ar resfile
Specifies the file that will receive the test case result.
If not specified, the test case prints its results to stdout.
If the result of a test case needs to be parsed by another program, you must
use this option to redirect the result to a file and then read the resulting
file from the other program.
Note:
.Em do not try to process the stdout of the test case
because your program may break in the future.
.It Fl s Ar srcdir
The path to the directory where the test program is located.
This is needed in all cases, except when the test program is being executed
from the current directory.
The test program will use this path to locate any helper data files or
utilities.
.It Fl v Ar var=value
Sets the configuration variable
.Ar var
to the value
.Ar value .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1
