@node ntpq Invocation
@section Invoking ntpq
@pindex ntpq
@cindex standard NTP query program
@ignore
#
# EDIT THIS FILE WITH CAUTION  (invoke-ntpq.texi)
#
# It has been AutoGen-ed  February 20, 2019 at 09:57:01 AM by AutoGen 5.18.5
# From the definitions    ntpq-opts.def
# and the template file   agtexi-cmd.tpl
@end ignore


The
@code{ntpq}
utility program is used to query NTP servers to monitor NTP operations
and performance, requesting
information about current state and/or changes in that state.
The program may be run either in interactive mode or controlled using
command line arguments.
Requests to read and write arbitrary
variables can be assembled, with raw and pretty-printed output
options being available.
The
@code{ntpq}
utility can also obtain and print a
list of peers in a common format by sending multiple queries to the
server.

If one or more request options is included on the command line
when
@code{ntpq}
is executed, each of the requests will be sent
to the NTP servers running on each of the hosts given as command
line arguments, or on localhost by default.
If no request options
are given,
@code{ntpq}
will attempt to read commands from the
standard input and execute these on the NTP server running on the
first host given on the command line, again defaulting to localhost
when no other host is specified.
The
@code{ntpq}
utility will prompt for
commands if the standard input is a terminal device.

@code{ntpq}
uses NTP mode 6 packets to communicate with the
NTP server, and hence can be used to query any compatible server on
the network which permits it.
Note that since NTP is a UDP protocol
this communication will be somewhat unreliable, especially over
large distances in terms of network topology.
The
@code{ntpq}
utility makes
one attempt to retransmit requests, and will time requests out if
the remote host is not heard from within a suitable timeout
time.

Note that in contexts where a host name is expected, a
@code{-4}
qualifier preceding the host name forces resolution to the IPv4
namespace, while a
@code{-6}
qualifier forces resolution to the IPv6 namespace.
For examples and usage, see the
@quotedblleft{}NTP Debugging Techniques@quotedblright{}
page.

Specifying a
command line option other than
@code{-i}
or
@code{-n}
will
cause the specified query (queries) to be sent to the indicated
host(s) immediately.
Otherwise,
@code{ntpq}
will attempt to read
interactive format commands from the standard input.

@subsubsection Internal Commands

Interactive format commands consist of a keyword followed by zero
to four arguments.
Only enough characters of the full keyword to
uniquely identify the command need be typed.

A
number of interactive format commands are executed entirely within
the
@code{ntpq}
utility itself and do not result in NTP
requests being sent to a server.
These are described following.
@table @asis
@item @code{?} @code{[@kbd{command}]}
@item @code{help} @code{[@kbd{command}]}
A
@quoteleft{}?@quoteright{}
by itself will print a list of all the commands
known to
@code{ntpq}
A
@quoteleft{}?@quoteright{}
followed by a command name will print function and usage
information about the command.
@item @code{addvars} @kbd{name}@code{[=@kbd{value}]}@code{[,...]}
@item @code{rmvars} @kbd{name}@code{[,...]}
@item @code{clearvars}
@item @code{showvars}
The arguments to this command consist of a list of
items of the form
@kbd{name}@code{[=@kbd{value}]},
where the
.No = Ns Ar value
is ignored, and can be omitted,
in requests to the server to read variables.
The
@code{ntpq}
utility maintains an internal list in which data to be included in
messages can be assembled, and displayed or set using the
@code{readlist}
and
@code{writelist}
commands described below.
The
@code{addvars}
command allows variables and their optional values to be added to
the list.
If more than one variable is to be added, the list should
be comma-separated and not contain white space.
The
@code{rmvars}
command can be used to remove individual variables from the list,
while the
@code{clearvars}
command removes all variables from the
list.
The
@code{showvars}
command displays the current list of optional variables.
@item @code{authenticate} @code{[@code{yes}|@code{no}]}
Normally
@code{ntpq}
does not authenticate requests unless
they are write requests.
The command
@code{authenticate} @code{yes}
causes
@code{ntpq}
to send authentication with all requests it
makes.
Authenticated requests causes some servers to handle
requests slightly differently.
The command
@code{authenticate}
causes
@code{ntpq}
to display whether or not
it is currently authenticating requests.
@item @code{cooked}
Causes output from query commands to be "cooked", so that
variables which are recognized by
@code{ntpq}
will have their
values reformatted for human consumption.
Variables which
@code{ntpq}
could not decode completely are
marked with a trailing
@quoteleft{}?@quoteright{}.
@item @code{debug} @code{[@code{more}|@code{less}|@code{off}]}
With no argument, displays the current debug level.
Otherwise, the debugging level is changed as indicated.
@item @code{delay} @code{[@kbd{milliseconds}]}
Specify a time interval to be added to timestamps included in
requests which require authentication.
This is used to enable
(unreliable) server reconfiguration over long delay network paths
or between machines whose clocks are unsynchronized.
Actually the
server does not now require timestamps in authenticated requests,
so this command may be obsolete.
Without any arguments, displays the current delay.
@item @code{drefid} @code{[@code{hash}|@code{ipv4}]}
Display refids as IPv4 or hash.
Without any arguments, displays whether refids are shown as IPv4
addresses or hashes.
@item @code{exit}
Exit
@code{ntpq}
@item @code{host} @code{[@kbd{name}]}
Set the host to which future queries will be sent.
The
@kbd{name}
may be either a host name or a numeric address.
Without any arguments, displays the current host.
@item @code{hostnames} @code{[@code{yes}|@code{no}]}
If
@code{yes}
is specified, host names are printed in
information displays.
If
@code{no}
is specified, numeric
addresses are printed instead.
The default is
@code{yes},
unless
modified using the command line
@code{-n}
switch.
Without any arguments, displays whether host names or numeric addresses
are shown.
@item @code{keyid} @code{[@kbd{keyid}]}
This command allows the specification of a key number to be
used to authenticate configuration requests.
This must correspond
to the
@code{controlkey}
key number the server has been configured to use for this
purpose.
Without any arguments, displays the current
@kbd{keyid}.
@item @code{keytype} @code{[@kbd{digest}]}
Specify the digest algorithm to use for authenticating requests, with default
@code{MD5}.
If
@code{ntpq}
was built with OpenSSL support, and OpenSSL is installed,
@kbd{digest}
can be any message digest algorithm supported by OpenSSL.
If no argument is given, the current
@code{keytype} @kbd{digest}
algorithm used is displayed.
@item @code{ntpversion} @code{[@code{1}|@code{2}|@code{3}|@code{4}]}
Sets the NTP version number which
@code{ntpq}
claims in
packets.
Defaults to 3, and note that mode 6 control messages (and
modes, for that matter) didn't exist in NTP version 1.
There appear
to be no servers left which demand version 1.
With no argument, displays the current NTP version that will be used
when communicating with servers.
@item @code{passwd}
This command prompts you to type in a password (which will not
be echoed) which will be used to authenticate configuration
requests.
The password must correspond to the key configured for
use by the NTP server for this purpose if such requests are to be
successful.
@item @code{poll} @code{[@kbd{n}]} @code{[@code{verbose}]}
Poll an NTP server in client mode
@kbd{n}
times.
Poll not implemented yet.
@item @code{quit}
Exit
@code{ntpq}
@item @code{raw}
Causes all output from query commands is printed as received
from the remote server.
The only formating/interpretation done on
the data is to transform nonascii data into a printable (but barely
understandable) form.
@item @code{timeout} @code{[@kbd{milliseconds}]}
Specify a timeout period for responses to server queries.
The
default is about 5000 milliseconds.
Without any arguments, displays the current timeout period.
Note that since
@code{ntpq}
retries each query once after a timeout, the total waiting time for
a timeout will be twice the timeout value set.
@item @code{version}
Display the version of the
@code{ntpq}
program.
@end table

@subsubsection Control Message Commands
Association ids are used to identify system, peer and clock variables.
System variables are assigned an association id of zero and system name
space, while each association is assigned a nonzero association id and
peer namespace.
Most control commands send a single message to the server and expect a
single response message.
The exceptions are the
@code{peers}
command, which sends a series of messages,
and the
@code{mreadlist}
and
@code{mreadvar}
commands, which iterate over a range of associations.
@table @asis
@item @code{apeers}
Display a list of peers in the form:
@example
[tally]remote refid assid st t when pool reach delay offset jitter
@end example
where the output is just like the
@code{peers}
command except that the
@code{refid}
is displayed in hex format and the association number is also displayed.
@item @code{associations}
Display a list of mobilized associations in the form:
@example
ind assid status conf reach auth condition last_event cnt
@end example
@table @asis
@item Sy Variable Ta Sy Description
@item @code{ind} @code{Ta} @code{index} @code{on} @code{this} @code{list}
@item @code{assid} @code{Ta} @code{association} @code{id}
@item @code{status} @code{Ta} @code{peer} @code{status} @code{word}
@item @code{conf} @code{Ta} @code{yes}: @code{No} @code{persistent,} @code{no}: @code{No} @code{ephemeral}
@item @code{reach} @code{Ta} @code{yes}: @code{No} @code{reachable,} @code{no}: @code{No} @code{unreachable}
@item @code{auth} @code{Ta} @code{ok}, @code{yes}, @code{bad} @code{No} @code{and} @code{none}
@item @code{condition} @code{Ta} @code{selection} @code{status} @code{(see} @code{the} @code{select} @code{No} @code{field} @code{of} @code{the} @code{peer} @code{status} @code{word)}
@item @code{last_event} @code{Ta} @code{event} @code{report} @code{(see} @code{the} @code{event} @code{No} @code{field} @code{of} @code{the} @code{peer} @code{status} @code{word)}
@item @code{cnt} @code{Ta} @code{event} @code{count} @code{(see} @code{the} @code{count} @code{No} @code{field} @code{of} @code{the} @code{peer} @code{status} @code{word)}
@end table
@item @code{authinfo}
Display the authentication statistics counters:
time since reset, stored keys, free keys, key lookups, keys not found,
uncached keys, expired keys, encryptions, decryptions.
@item @code{clocklist} @code{[@kbd{associd}]}
@item @code{cl} @code{[@kbd{associd}]}
Display all clock variables in the variable list for those associations
supporting a reference clock.
@item @code{clockvar} @code{[@kbd{associd}]} @code{[@kbd{name}@code{[=@kbd{value}]}]}@code{[,...]}
@item @code{cv} @code{[@kbd{associd}]} @code{[@kbd{name}@code{[=@kbd{value}]}]}@code{[,...]}
Display a list of clock variables for those associations supporting a
reference clock.
@item @code{:config} @kbd{configuration command line}
Send the remainder of the command line, including whitespace, to the
server as a run-time configuration command in the same format as a line
in the configuration file.
This command is experimental until further notice and clarification.
Authentication is of course required.
@item @code{config-from-file} @kbd{filename}
Send each line of
@kbd{filename}
to the server as run-time configuration commands in the same format as
lines in the configuration file.
This command is experimental until further notice and clarification.
Authentication is required.
@item @code{ifstats}
Display status and statistics counters for each local network interface address:
interface number, interface name and address or broadcast, drop, flag,
ttl, mc, received, sent, send failed, peers, uptime.
Authentication is required.
@item @code{iostats}
Display network and reference clock I/O statistics:
time since reset, receive buffers, free receive buffers, used receive buffers,
low water refills, dropped packets, ignored packets, received packets,
packets sent, packet send failures, input wakeups, useful input wakeups.
@item @code{kerninfo}
Display kernel loop and PPS statistics:
associd, status, pll offset, pll frequency, maximum error,
estimated error, kernel status, pll time constant, precision,
frequency tolerance, pps frequency, pps stability, pps jitter,
calibration interval, calibration cycles, jitter exceeded,
stability exceeded, calibration errors.
As with other ntpq output, times are in milliseconds; very small values
may be shown as exponentials.
The precision value displayed is in milliseconds as well, unlike the
precision system variable.
@item @code{lassociations}
Perform the same function as the associations command, except display
mobilized and unmobilized associations, including all clients.
@item @code{lopeers} @code{[@code{-4}|@code{-6}]}
Display a list of all peers and clients showing
@code{dstadr}
(associated with the given IP version).
@item @code{lpassociations}
Display the last obtained list of associations, including all clients.
@item @code{lpeers} @code{[@code{-4}|@code{-6}]}
Display a list of all peers and clients (associated with the given IP version).
@item @code{monstats}
Display monitor facility status, statistics, and limits:
enabled, addresses, peak addresses, maximum addresses,
reclaim above count, reclaim older than, kilobytes, maximum kilobytes.
@item @code{mreadlist} @kbd{associdlo} @kbd{associdhi}
@item @code{mrl} @kbd{associdlo} @kbd{associdhi}
Perform the same function as the
@code{readlist}
command for a range of association ids.
@item @code{mreadvar} @kbd{associdlo} @kbd{associdhi} @code{[@kbd{name}]}@code{[,...]}
This range may be determined from the list displayed by any
command showing associations.
@item @code{mrv} @kbd{associdlo} @kbd{associdhi} @code{[@kbd{name}]}@code{[,...]}
Perform the same function as the
@code{readvar}
command for a range of association ids.
This range may be determined from the list displayed by any
command showing associations.
@item @code{mrulist} @code{[@code{limited} | @code{kod} | @code{mincount}=@kbd{count} | @code{laddr}=@kbd{localaddr} | @code{sort}=@code{[-]}@kbd{sortorder} | @code{resany}=@kbd{hexmask} | @code{resall}=@kbd{hexmask}]}
Display traffic counts of the most recently seen source addresses
collected and maintained by the monitor facility.
With the exception of
@code{sort}=@code{[-]}@kbd{sortorder},
the options filter the list returned by
@code{ntpd(8)}.
The
@code{limited}
and
@code{kod}
options return only entries representing client addresses from which the
last packet received triggered either discarding or a KoD response.
The
@code{mincount}=@kbd{count}
option filters entries representing less than
@kbd{count}
packets.
The
@code{laddr}=@kbd{localaddr}
option filters entries for packets received on any local address other than
@kbd{localaddr}.
@code{resany}=@kbd{hexmask}
and
@code{resall}=@kbd{hexmask}
filter entries containing none or less than all, respectively, of the bits in
@kbd{hexmask},
which must begin with
@code{0x}.
The
@kbd{sortorder}
defaults to
@code{lstint}
and may be 
@code{addr},
@code{avgint},
@code{count},
@code{lstint},
or any of those preceded by
@quoteleft{}-@quoteright{}
to reverse the sort order.
The output columns are:
@table @asis
@item Column
Description
@item @code{lstint}
Interval in seconds between the receipt of the most recent packet from
this address and the completion of the retrieval of the MRU list by
@code{ntpq}
@item @code{avgint}
Average interval in s between packets from this address.
@item @code{rstr}
Restriction flags associated with this address.
Most are copied unchanged from the matching
@code{restrict}
command, however 0x400 (kod) and 0x20 (limited) flags are cleared unless
the last packet from this address triggered a rate control response.
@item @code{r}
Rate control indicator, either
a period,
@code{L}
or
@code{K}
for no rate control response,
rate limiting by discarding, or rate limiting with a KoD response, respectively.
@item @code{m}
Packet mode.
@item @code{v}
Packet version number.
@item @code{count}
Packets received from this address.
@item @code{rport}
Source port of last packet from this address.
@item @code{remote} @code{address}
host or DNS name, numeric address, or address followed by
claimed DNS name which could not be verified in parentheses.
@end table
@item @code{opeers} @code{[@code{-4} | @code{-6}]}
Obtain and print the old-style list of all peers and clients showing
@code{dstadr}
(associated with the given IP version),
rather than the
@code{refid}.
@item @code{passociations}
Perform the same function as the
@code{associations}
command,
except that it uses previously stored data rather than making a new query.
@item @code{peers}
Display a list of peers in the form:
@example
[tally]remote refid st t when pool reach delay offset jitter
@end example
@table @asis
@item Variable
Description
@item @code{[tally]}
single-character code indicating current value of the
@code{select}
field of the
.Lk decode.html#peer "peer status word"
@item @code{remote}
host name (or IP number) of peer.
The value displayed will be truncated to 15 characters unless the
@code{ntpq}
@code{-w}
option is given, in which case the full value will be displayed
on the first line, and if too long,
the remaining data will be displayed on the next line.
@item @code{refid}
source IP address or
.Lk decode.html#kiss "'kiss code"
@item @code{st}
stratum: 0 for local reference clocks, 1 for servers with local
reference clocks, ..., 16 for unsynchronized server clocks
@item @code{t}
@code{u}:
unicast or manycast client,
@code{b}:
broadcast or multicast client,
@code{p}:
pool source,
@code{l}:
local (reference clock),
@code{s}:
symmetric (peer),
@code{A}:
manycast server,
@code{B}:
broadcast server,
@code{M}:
multicast server
@item @code{when}
time in seconds, minutes, hours, or days since the last packet
was received, or
@quoteleft{}-@quoteright{}
if a packet has never been received
@item @code{poll}
poll interval (s)
@item @code{reach}
reach shift register (octal)
@item @code{delay}
roundtrip delay
@item @code{offset}
offset of server relative to this host
@item @code{jitter}
offset RMS error estimate.
@end table
@item @code{pstats} @kbd{associd}
Display the statistics for the peer with the given
@kbd{associd}:
associd, status, remote host, local address, time last received,
time until next send, reachability change, packets sent,
packets received, bad authentication, bogus origin, duplicate,
bad dispersion, bad reference time, candidate order.
@item @code{readlist} @code{[@kbd{associd}]}
@item @code{rl} @code{[@kbd{associd}]}
Display all system or peer variables.
If the
@kbd{associd}
is omitted, it is assumed to be zero.
@item @code{readvar} @code{[@kbd{associd} @kbd{name}@code{[=@kbd{value}]} @code{[, ...]}]}
@item @code{rv} @code{[@kbd{associd} @kbd{name}@code{[=@kbd{value}]} @code{[, ...]}]}
Display the specified system or peer variables.
If
@kbd{associd}
is zero, the variables are from the
@ref{System Variables}
name space, otherwise they are from the
@ref{Peer Variables}
name space.
The
@kbd{associd}
is required, as the same name can occur in both spaces.
If no
@kbd{name}
is included, all operative variables in the name space are displayed.
In this case only, if the
@kbd{associd}
is omitted, it is assumed to be zero.
Multiple names are specified with comma separators and without whitespace.
Note that time values are represented in milliseconds
and frequency values in parts-per-million (PPM).
Some NTP timestamps are represented in the format
@kbd{YYYY}@kbd{MM} @kbd{DD} @kbd{TTTT},
where
@kbd{YYYY}
is the year,
@kbd{MM}
the month of year,
@kbd{DD}
the day of month and
@kbd{TTTT}
the time of day.
@item @code{reslist}
Display the access control (restrict) list for
@code{ntpq}
Authentication is required.
@item @code{saveconfig} @kbd{filename}
Save the current configuration,
including any runtime modifications made by
@code{:config}
or
@code{config-from-file},
to the NTP server host file
@kbd{filename}.
This command will be rejected by the server unless
.Lk miscopt.html#saveconfigdir "saveconfigdir"
appears in the
@code{ntpd(8)}
configuration file.
@kbd{filename}
can use
@code{date(1)}
format specifiers to substitute the current date and time, for
example,
@example
@code{saveconfig} @file{ntp-%Y%m%d-%H%M%S.conf}. 
@end example
The filename used is stored in system variable
@code{savedconfig}.
Authentication is required.
@item @code{sysinfo}
Display system operational summary:
associd, status, system peer, system peer mode, leap indicator,
stratum, log2 precision, root delay, root dispersion,
reference id, reference time, system jitter, clock jitter,
clock wander, broadcast delay, symm. auth. delay.
@item @code{sysstats}
Display system uptime and packet counts maintained in the
protocol module:
uptime, sysstats reset, packets received, current version,
older version, bad length or format, authentication failed,
declined, restricted, rate limited, KoD responses,
processed for time.
@item @code{timerstats}
Display interval timer counters:
time since reset, timer overruns, calls to transmit.
@item @code{writelist} @kbd{associd}
Set all system or peer variables included in the variable list.
@item @code{writevar} @kbd{associd} @kbd{name}=@kbd{value} @code{[, ...]}
Set the specified variables in the variable list.
If the
@kbd{associd}
is zero, the variables are from the
@ref{System Variables}
name space, otherwise they are from the
@ref{Peer Variables}
name space.
The
@kbd{associd}
is required, as the same name can occur in both spaces.
Authentication is required.
@end table

@subsubsection Status Words and Kiss Codes
The current state of the operating program is shown
in a set of status words
maintained by the system.
Status information is also available on a per-association basis.
These words are displayed by the
@code{readlist}
and
@code{associations}
commands both in hexadecimal and in decoded short tip strings.
The codes, tips and short explanations are documented on the
.Lk decode.html "Event Messages and Status Words"
page.
The page also includes a list of system and peer messages,
the code for the latest of which is included in the status word.

Information resulting from protocol machine state transitions
is displayed using an informal set of ASCII strings called
.Lk decode.html#kiss "kiss codes" .
The original purpose was for kiss-o'-death (KoD) packets
sent by the server to advise the client of an unusual condition.
They are now displayed, when appropriate,
in the reference identifier field in various billboards.

@subsubsection System Variables
The following system variables appear in the
@code{readlist}
billboard.
Not all variables are displayed in some configurations.

@table @asis
@item Variable
Description
@item @code{status}
.Lk decode.html#sys "system status word"
@item @code{version}
NTP software version and build time
@item @code{processor}
hardware platform and version
@item @code{system}
operating system and version
@item @code{leap}
leap warning indicator (0-3)
@item @code{stratum}
stratum (1-15)
@item @code{precision}
precision (log2 s)
@item @code{rootdelay}
total roundtrip delay to the primary reference clock
@item @code{rootdisp}
total dispersion to the primary reference clock
@item @code{refid}
reference id or
.Lk decode.html#kiss "kiss code"
@item @code{reftime}
reference time
@item @code{clock}
date and time of day
@item @code{peer}
system peer association id
@item @code{tc}
time constant and poll exponent (log2 s) (3-17)
@item @code{mintc}
minimum time constant (log2 s) (3-10)
@item @code{offset}
combined offset of server relative to this host
@item @code{frequency}
frequency drift (PPM) relative to hardware clock
@item @code{sys_jitter}
combined system jitter
@item @code{clk_wander}
clock frequency wander (PPM)
@item @code{clk_jitter}
clock jitter
@item @code{tai}
TAI-UTC offset (s)
@item @code{leapsec}
NTP seconds when the next leap second is/was inserted
@item @code{expire}
NTP seconds when the NIST leapseconds file expires
@end table
The jitter and wander statistics are exponentially-weighted RMS averages.
The system jitter is defined in the NTPv4 specification;
the clock jitter statistic is computed by the clock discipline module.

When the NTPv4 daemon is compiled with the OpenSSL software library,
additional system variables are displayed,
including some or all of the following,
depending on the particular Autokey dance:
@table @asis
@item Variable
Description
@item @code{host}
Autokey host name for this host
@item @code{ident}
Autokey group name for this host
@item @code{flags}
host flags  (see Autokey specification)
@item @code{digest}
OpenSSL message digest algorithm
@item @code{signature}
OpenSSL digest/signature scheme
@item @code{update}
NTP seconds at last signature update
@item @code{cert}
certificate subject, issuer and certificate flags
@item @code{until}
NTP seconds when the certificate expires
@end table
@subsubsection Peer Variables
The following peer variables appear in the
@code{readlist}
billboard for each association.
Not all variables are displayed in some configurations.

@table @asis
@item Variable
Description
@item @code{associd}
association id
@item @code{status}
.Lk decode.html#peer "peer status word"
@item @code{srcadr}
source (remote) IP address
@item @code{srcport}
source (remote) port
@item @code{dstadr}
destination (local) IP address
@item @code{dstport}
destination (local) port
@item @code{leap}
leap indicator (0-3)
@item @code{stratum}
stratum (0-15)
@item @code{precision}
precision (log2 s)
@item @code{rootdelay}
total roundtrip delay to the primary reference clock
@item @code{rootdisp}
total root dispersion to the primary reference clock
@item @code{refid}
reference id or
.Lk decode.html#kiss "kiss code"
@item @code{reftime}
reference time
@item @code{rec}
last packet received time
@item @code{reach}
reach register (octal)
@item @code{unreach}
unreach counter
@item @code{hmode}
host mode (1-6)
@item @code{pmode}
peer mode (1-5)
@item @code{hpoll}
host poll exponent (log2 s) (3-17)
@item @code{ppoll}
peer poll exponent (log2 s) (3-17)
@item @code{headway}
headway (see
.Lk rate.html "Rate Management and the Kiss-o'-Death Packet" )
@item @code{flash}
.Lk decode.html#flash "flash status word"
@item @code{keyid}
symmetric key id
@item @code{offset}
filter offset
@item @code{delay}
filter delay
@item @code{dispersion}
filter dispersion
@item @code{jitter}
filter jitter
@item @code{bias}
unicast/broadcast bias
@item @code{xleave}
interleave delay (see
.Lk xleave.html "NTP Interleaved Modes" )
@end table
The
@code{bias}
variable is calculated when the first broadcast packet is received
after the calibration volley.
It represents the offset of the broadcast subgraph relative to the
unicast subgraph.
The
@code{xleave}
variable appears only for the interleaved symmetric and interleaved modes.
It represents the internal queuing, buffering and transmission delays
for the preceding packet.

When the NTPv4 daemon is compiled with the OpenSSL software library,
additional peer variables are displayed, including the following:
@table @asis
@item Variable
Description
@item @code{flags}
peer flags (see Autokey specification)
@item @code{host}
Autokey server name
@item @code{flags}
peer flags (see Autokey specification)
@item @code{signature}
OpenSSL digest/signature scheme
@item @code{initsequence}
initial key id
@item @code{initkey}
initial key index
@item @code{timestamp}
Autokey signature timestamp
@item @code{ident}
Autokey group name for this association
@end table

@subsubsection Clock Variables
The following clock variables appear in the
@code{clocklist}
billboard for each association with a reference clock.
Not all variables are displayed in some configurations.
@table @asis
@item Variable
Description
@item @code{associd}
association id
@item @code{status}
.Lk decode.html#clock "clock status word"
@item @code{device}
device description
@item @code{timecode}
ASCII time code string (specific to device)
@item @code{poll}
poll messages sent
@item @code{noreply}
no reply
@item @code{badformat}
bad format
@item @code{baddata}
bad date or time
@item @code{fudgetime1}
fudge time 1
@item @code{fudgetime2}
fudge time 2
@item @code{stratum}
driver stratum
@item @code{refid}
driver reference id
@item @code{flags}
driver flags
@end table

This section was generated by @strong{AutoGen},
using the @code{agtexi-cmd} template and the option descriptions for the @code{ntpq} program.
This software is released under the NTP license, <http://ntp.org/license>.

@menu
* ntpq usage::                  ntpq help/usage (@option{--help})
* ntpq ipv4::                   ipv4 option (-4)
* ntpq ipv6::                   ipv6 option (-6)
* ntpq command::                command option (-c)
* ntpq interactive::            interactive option (-i)
* ntpq numeric::                numeric option (-n)
* ntpq old-rv::                 old-rv option
* ntpq peers::                  peers option (-p)
* ntpq refid::                  refid option (-r)
* ntpq wide::                   wide option (-w)
* ntpq config::                 presetting/configuring ntpq
* ntpq exit status::            exit status
@end menu

@node ntpq usage
@subsection ntpq help/usage (@option{--help})
@cindex ntpq help

This is the automatically generated usage text for ntpq.

The text printed is the same whether selected with the @code{help} option
(@option{--help}) or the @code{more-help} option (@option{--more-help}).  @code{more-help} will print
the usage text by passing it through a pager program.
@code{more-help} is disabled on platforms without a working
@code{fork(2)} function.  The @code{PAGER} environment variable is
used to select the program, defaulting to @file{more}.  Both will exit
with a status code of 0.

@exampleindent 0
@example
ntpq - standard NTP query program - Ver. 4.2.8p13
Usage:  ntpq [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]... [ host ...]
  Flg Arg Option-Name    Description
   -4 no  ipv4           Force IPv4 name resolution
                                - prohibits the option 'ipv6'
   -6 no  ipv6           Force IPv6 name resolution
                                - prohibits the option 'ipv4'
   -c Str command        run a command and exit
                                - may appear multiple times
   -d no  debug-level    Increase debug verbosity level
                                - may appear multiple times
   -D Num set-debug-level Set the debug verbosity level
                                - may appear multiple times
   -i no  interactive    Force ntpq to operate in interactive mode
                                - prohibits these options:
                                command
                                peers
   -n no  numeric        numeric host addresses
      no  old-rv         Always output status line with readvar
   -p no  peers          Print a list of the peers
                                - prohibits the option 'interactive'
   -r KWd refid          Set default display type for S2+ refids
   -w no  wide           Display the full 'remote' value
      opt version        output version information and exit
   -? no  help           display extended usage information and exit
   -! no  more-help      extended usage information passed thru pager
   -> opt save-opts      save the option state to a config file
   -< Str load-opts      load options from a config file
                                - disabled as '--no-load-opts'
                                - may appear multiple times

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.

The following option preset mechanisms are supported:
 - reading file $HOME/.ntprc
 - reading file ./.ntprc
 - examining environment variables named NTPQ_*

The valid "refid" option keywords are:
  hash ipv4
  or an integer from 0 through 1

Please send bug reports to:  <http://bugs.ntp.org, bugs@@ntp.org>
@end example
@exampleindent 4

@node ntpq ipv4
@subsection ipv4 option (-4)
@cindex ntpq-ipv4

This is the ``force ipv4 name resolution'' option.

@noindent
This option has some usage constraints.  It:
@itemize @bullet
@item
must not appear in combination with any of the following options:
ipv6.
@end itemize

Force resolution of following host names on the command line
to the IPv4 namespace.
@node ntpq ipv6
@subsection ipv6 option (-6)
@cindex ntpq-ipv6

This is the ``force ipv6 name resolution'' option.

@noindent
This option has some usage constraints.  It:
@itemize @bullet
@item
must not appear in combination with any of the following options:
ipv4.
@end itemize

Force resolution of following host names on the command line
to the IPv6 namespace.
@node ntpq command
@subsection command option (-c)
@cindex ntpq-command

This is the ``run a command and exit'' option.
This option takes a string argument @file{cmd}.

@noindent
This option has some usage constraints.  It:
@itemize @bullet
@item
may appear an unlimited number of times.
@end itemize

The following argument is interpreted as an interactive format command
and is added to the list of commands to be executed on the specified
host(s).
@node ntpq interactive
@subsection interactive option (-i)
@cindex ntpq-interactive

This is the ``force ntpq to operate in interactive mode'' option.

@noindent
This option has some usage constraints.  It:
@itemize @bullet
@item
must not appear in combination with any of the following options:
command, peers.
@end itemize

Force @code{ntpq} to operate in interactive mode.
Prompts will be written to the standard output and
commands read from the standard input.
@node ntpq numeric
@subsection numeric option (-n)
@cindex ntpq-numeric

This is the ``numeric host addresses'' option.
Output all host addresses in dotted-quad numeric format rather than
converting to the canonical host names.
@node ntpq old-rv
@subsection old-rv option
@cindex ntpq-old-rv

This is the ``always output status line with readvar'' option.
By default, @code{ntpq} now suppresses the @code{associd=...}
line that precedes the output of @code{readvar}
(alias @code{rv}) when a single variable is requested, such as
@code{ntpq -c "rv 0 offset"}.
This option causes @code{ntpq} to include both lines of output
for a single-variable @code{readvar}.
Using an environment variable to
preset this option in a script will enable both older and
newer @code{ntpq} to behave identically in this regard.
@node ntpq peers
@subsection peers option (-p)
@cindex ntpq-peers

This is the ``print a list of the peers'' option.

@noindent
This option has some usage constraints.  It:
@itemize @bullet
@item
must not appear in combination with any of the following options:
interactive.
@end itemize

Print a list of the peers known to the server as well as a summary
of their state. This is equivalent to the 'peers' interactive command.
@node ntpq refid
@subsection refid option (-r)
@cindex ntpq-refid

This is the ``set default display type for s2+ refids'' option.
This option takes a keyword argument.

@noindent
This option has some usage constraints.  It:
@itemize @bullet
@item
This option takes a keyword as its argument.
The argument sets an enumeration value that can be tested by comparing the option value macro (OPT_VALUE_REFID).
The available keywords are:
@example
    hash ipv4
@end example

or their numeric equivalent.@end itemize

Set the default display format for S2+ refids.
@node ntpq wide
@subsection wide option (-w)
@cindex ntpq-wide

This is the ``display the full 'remote' value'' option.
Display the full value of the 'remote' value.  If this requires
more than 15 characters, display the full value, emit a newline,
and continue the data display properly indented on the next line.


@node ntpq config
@subsection presetting/configuring ntpq

Any option that is not marked as @i{not presettable} may be preset by
loading values from configuration ("rc" or "ini") files, and values from environment variables named @code{NTPQ} and @code{NTPQ_<OPTION_NAME>}.  @code{<OPTION_NAME>} must be one of
the options listed above in upper case and segmented with underscores.
The @code{NTPQ} variable will be tokenized and parsed like
the command line.  The remaining variables are tested for existence and their
values are treated like option arguments.


@noindent
@code{libopts} will search in 2 places for configuration files:
@itemize @bullet
@item
$HOME
@item
$PWD
@end itemize
The environment variables @code{HOME}, and @code{PWD}
are expanded and replaced when @file{ntpq} runs.
For any of these that are plain files, they are simply processed.
For any that are directories, then a file named @file{.ntprc} is searched for
within that directory and processed.

Configuration files may be in a wide variety of formats.
The basic format is an option name followed by a value (argument) on the
same line.  Values may be separated from the option name with a colon,
equal sign or simply white space.  Values may be continued across multiple
lines by escaping the newline with a backslash.

Multiple programs may also share the same initialization file.
Common options are collected at the top, followed by program specific
segments.  The segments are separated by lines like:
@example
[NTPQ]
@end example
@noindent
or by
@example
<?program ntpq>
@end example
@noindent
Do not mix these styles within one configuration file.

Compound values and carefully constructed string values may also be
specified using XML syntax:
@example
<option-name>
   <sub-opt>...&lt;...&gt;...</sub-opt>
</option-name>
@end example
@noindent
yielding an @code{option-name.sub-opt} string value of
@example
"...<...>..."
@end example
@code{AutoOpts} does not track suboptions.  You simply note that it is a
hierarchicly valued option.  @code{AutoOpts} does provide a means for searching
the associated name/value pair list (see: optionFindValue).

The command line options relating to configuration and/or usage help are:

@subsubheading version (-)

Print the program version to standard out, optionally with licensing
information, then exit 0.  The optional argument specifies how much licensing
detail to provide.  The default is to print just the version.  The licensing infomation may be selected with an option argument.
Only the first letter of the argument is examined:

@table @samp
@item version
Only print the version.  This is the default.
@item copyright
Name the copyright usage licensing terms.
@item verbose
Print the full copyright usage licensing terms.
@end table

@node ntpq exit status
@subsection ntpq exit status

One of the following exit values will be returned:
@table @samp
@item 0 (EXIT_SUCCESS)
Successful program execution.
@item 1 (EXIT_FAILURE)
The operation failed or the command syntax was not valid.
@item 66 (EX_NOINPUT)
A specified configuration file could not be loaded.
@item 70 (EX_SOFTWARE)
libopts had an internal operational error.  Please report
it to autogen-users@@lists.sourceforge.net.  Thank you.
@end table
