Documentation/media/uapi/v4l/pixfmt-v4l2.rst, before:

.. -*- coding: utf-8; mode: rst -*-

******************************
Single-planar format structure
******************************

.. tabularcolumns:: |p{4.0cm}|p{2.5cm}|p{11.0cm}|

.. c:type:: v4l2_pix_format

.. cssclass:: longtable

.. flat-table:: struct v4l2_pix_format
    :header-rows:  0
    :stub-columns: 0
    :widths:       1 1 2

    * - __u32
      - ``width``
      - Image width in pixels.
    * - __u32
      - ``height``
      - Image height in pixels. If ``field`` is one of ``V4L2_FIELD_TOP``,
	``V4L2_FIELD_BOTTOM`` or ``V4L2_FIELD_ALTERNATE`` then height
	refers to the number of lines in the field, otherwise it refers to
	the number of lines in the frame (which is twice the field height
	for interlaced formats).
    * - :cspan:`2` Applications set these fields to request an image
	size, drivers return the closest possible values. In case of
	planar formats the ``width`` and ``height`` applies to the largest
	plane. To avoid ambiguities drivers must return values rounded up
	to a multiple of the scale factor of any smaller planes. For
	example when the image format is YUV 4:2:0, ``width`` and
	``height`` must be multiples of two.
    * - __u32
      - ``pixelformat``
      - The pixel format or type of compression, set by the application.
	This is a little endian
	:ref:`four character code <v4l2-fourcc>`. V4L2 defines standard
	RGB formats in :ref:`rgb-formats`, YUV formats in
	:ref:`yuv-formats`, and reserved codes in
	:ref:`reserved-formats`
    * - enum :c:type:`v4l2_field`
      - ``field``
      - Video images are typically interlaced. Applications can request to
	capture or output only the top or bottom field, or both fields
	interlaced or sequentially stored in one buffer or alternating in
	separate buffers. Drivers return the actual field order selected.
	For more details on fields see :ref:`field-order`.
    * - __u32
      - ``bytesperline``
      - Distance in bytes between the leftmost pixels in two adjacent
	lines.
    * - :cspan:`2`

	Both applications and drivers can set this field to request
	padding bytes at the end of each line. Drivers however may ignore
	the value requested by the application, returning ``width`` times
	bytes per pixel or a larger value required by the hardware. That
	implies applications can just set this field to zero to get a
	reasonable default.

	Video hardware may access padding bytes, therefore they must
	reside in accessible memory. Consider cases where padding bytes
	after the last line of an image cross a system page boundary.
	Input devices may write padding bytes, the value is undefined.
	Output devices ignore the contents of padding bytes.

	When the image format is planar the ``bytesperline`` value applies
	to the first plane and is divided by the same factor as the
	``width`` field for the other planes. For example the Cb and Cr
	planes of a YUV 4:2:0 image have half as many padding bytes
	following each line as the Y plane. To avoid ambiguities drivers
	must return a ``bytesperline`` value rounded up to a multiple of
	the scale factor.

	For compressed formats the ``bytesperline`` value makes no sense.
	Applications and drivers must set this to 0 in that case.
    * - __u32
      - ``sizeimage``
      - Size in bytes of the buffer to hold a complete image, set by the
	driver. Usually this is ``bytesperline`` times ``height``. When
	the image consists of variable length compressed data this is the
	maximum number of bytes required to hold an image.
    * - enum :c:type:`v4l2_colorspace`
      - ``colorspace``
      - This information supplements the ``pixelformat`` and must be set
	by the driver for capture streams and by the application for
	output streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - __u32
      - ``priv``
      - This field indicates whether the remaining fields of the
	struct :c:type:`v4l2_pix_format`, also called the
	extended fields, are valid. When set to
	``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC``, it indicates that the extended fields
	have been correctly initialized. When set to any other value it
	indicates that the extended fields contain undefined values.

	Applications that wish to use the pixel format extended fields
	must first ensure that the feature is supported by querying the
	device for the :ref:`V4L2_CAP_EXT_PIX_FORMAT <querycap>`
	capability. If the capability isn't set the pixel format extended
	fields are not supported and using the extended fields will lead
	to undefined results.

	To use the extended fields, applications must set the ``priv``
	field to ``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC``, initialize all the extended
	fields and zero the unused bytes of the
	struct :c:type:`v4l2_format` ``raw_data`` field.

	When the ``priv`` field isn't set to ``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC``
	drivers must act as if all the extended fields were set to zero.
	On return drivers must set the ``priv`` field to
	``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC`` and all the extended fields to
	applicable values.
    * - __u32
      - ``flags``
      - Flags set by the application or driver, see :ref:`format-flags`.
    * - enum :c:type:`v4l2_ycbcr_encoding`
      - ``ycbcr_enc``
      - This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - enum :c:type:`v4l2_hsv_encoding`
      - ``hsv_enc``
      - This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - enum :c:type:`v4l2_quantization`
      - ``quantization``
      - This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - enum :c:type:`v4l2_xfer_func`
      - ``xfer_func``
      - This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.

Commit message:

media: pixfmt-v4l2.rst: fix types
The v4l2_pix_format documentation still had 'enum's as types.
Replace by __u32 and add a reference to the enum.

Also put ycbcr_enc and hsv_enc in a union.

Signed-off-by: Hans Verkuil <hans.verkuil@cisco.com>
Signed-off-by: Mauro Carvalho Chehab <mchehab@s-opensource.com>

Documentation/media/uapi/v4l/pixfmt-v4l2.rst, after:

.. -*- coding: utf-8; mode: rst -*-

******************************
Single-planar format structure
******************************

.. tabularcolumns:: |p{4.0cm}|p{2.5cm}|p{11.0cm}|

.. c:type:: v4l2_pix_format

.. cssclass:: longtable

.. flat-table:: struct v4l2_pix_format
    :header-rows:  0
    :stub-columns: 0
    :widths:       1 1 2

    * - __u32
      - ``width``
      - Image width in pixels.
    * - __u32
      - ``height``
      - Image height in pixels. If ``field`` is one of ``V4L2_FIELD_TOP``,
	``V4L2_FIELD_BOTTOM`` or ``V4L2_FIELD_ALTERNATE`` then height
	refers to the number of lines in the field, otherwise it refers to
	the number of lines in the frame (which is twice the field height
	for interlaced formats).
    * - :cspan:`2` Applications set these fields to request an image
	size, drivers return the closest possible values. In case of
	planar formats the ``width`` and ``height`` applies to the largest
	plane. To avoid ambiguities drivers must return values rounded up
	to a multiple of the scale factor of any smaller planes. For
	example when the image format is YUV 4:2:0, ``width`` and
	``height`` must be multiples of two.
    * - __u32
      - ``pixelformat``
      - The pixel format or type of compression, set by the application.
	This is a little endian
	:ref:`four character code <v4l2-fourcc>`. V4L2 defines standard
	RGB formats in :ref:`rgb-formats`, YUV formats in
	:ref:`yuv-formats`, and reserved codes in
	:ref:`reserved-formats`
    * - __u32
      - ``field``
      - Field order, from enum :c:type:`v4l2_field`.
        Video images are typically interlaced. Applications can request to
	capture or output only the top or bottom field, or both fields
	interlaced or sequentially stored in one buffer or alternating in
	separate buffers. Drivers return the actual field order selected.
	For more details on fields see :ref:`field-order`.
    * - __u32
      - ``bytesperline``
      - Distance in bytes between the leftmost pixels in two adjacent
	lines.
    * - :cspan:`2`

	Both applications and drivers can set this field to request
	padding bytes at the end of each line. Drivers however may ignore
	the value requested by the application, returning ``width`` times
	bytes per pixel or a larger value required by the hardware. That
	implies applications can just set this field to zero to get a
	reasonable default.

	Video hardware may access padding bytes, therefore they must
	reside in accessible memory. Consider cases where padding bytes
	after the last line of an image cross a system page boundary.
	Input devices may write padding bytes, the value is undefined.
	Output devices ignore the contents of padding bytes.

	When the image format is planar the ``bytesperline`` value applies
	to the first plane and is divided by the same factor as the
	``width`` field for the other planes. For example the Cb and Cr
	planes of a YUV 4:2:0 image have half as many padding bytes
	following each line as the Y plane. To avoid ambiguities drivers
	must return a ``bytesperline`` value rounded up to a multiple of
	the scale factor.

	For compressed formats the ``bytesperline`` value makes no sense.
	Applications and drivers must set this to 0 in that case.
    * - __u32
      - ``sizeimage``
      - Size in bytes of the buffer to hold a complete image, set by the
	driver. Usually this is ``bytesperline`` times ``height``. When
	the image consists of variable length compressed data this is the
	maximum number of bytes required to hold an image.
    * - __u32
      - ``colorspace``
      - Image colorspace, from enum :c:type:`v4l2_colorspace`.
        This information supplements the ``pixelformat`` and must be set
	by the driver for capture streams and by the application for
	output streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - __u32
      - ``priv``
      - This field indicates whether the remaining fields of the
	struct :c:type:`v4l2_pix_format`, also called the
	extended fields, are valid. When set to
	``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC``, it indicates that the extended fields
	have been correctly initialized. When set to any other value it
	indicates that the extended fields contain undefined values.

	Applications that wish to use the pixel format extended fields
	must first ensure that the feature is supported by querying the
	device for the :ref:`V4L2_CAP_EXT_PIX_FORMAT <querycap>`
	capability. If the capability isn't set the pixel format extended
	fields are not supported and using the extended fields will lead
	to undefined results.

	To use the extended fields, applications must set the ``priv``
	field to ``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC``, initialize all the extended
	fields and zero the unused bytes of the
	struct :c:type:`v4l2_format` ``raw_data`` field.

	When the ``priv`` field isn't set to ``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC``
	drivers must act as if all the extended fields were set to zero.
	On return drivers must set the ``priv`` field to
	``V4L2_PIX_FMT_PRIV_MAGIC`` and all the extended fields to
	applicable values.
    * - __u32
      - ``flags``
      - Flags set by the application or driver, see :ref:`format-flags`.
    * - union {
      - (anonymous)
      -
    * - __u32
      - ``ycbcr_enc``
      - Y'CbCr encoding, from enum :c:type:`v4l2_ycbcr_encoding`.
        This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - __u32
      - ``hsv_enc``
      - HSV encoding, from enum :c:type:`v4l2_hsv_encoding`.
        This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - }
      -
      -
    * - __u32
      - ``quantization``
      - Quantization range, from enum :c:type:`v4l2_quantization`.
        This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
    * - __u32
      - ``xfer_func``
      - Transfer function, from enum :c:type:`v4l2_xfer_func`.
        This information supplements the ``colorspace`` and must be set by
	the driver for capture streams and by the application for output
	streams, see :ref:`colorspaces`.
