'\" t
.\"
.\" Copyright 2013 Darik Horn <dajhorn@vanadac.com>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.TH splat 1 "2013 MAR 16" "ZFS on Linux" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
splat \- Solaris Porting LAyer Tests
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.BI "splat [\-chvx] < \-\-all | \-\-list | \-\-test " "subsystem" ":" "test" " [...] >"

.SH DESCRIPTION
This utility uses the splat.ko kernel module to test the spl.ko kernel
module. Run "modprobe splat" before invoking \fBsplat\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
.HP
.BI "\-a" "" ", \-\-all" ""
.IP
Run all available tests on all subsystems.
.HP
.BI "\-c" "" ", \-\-nocolor" ""
.IP
Disable output highlighting. By default, "Fail" is printed in red text
and "Pass" is printed in green text.
.HP
.BI "\-h" "" ", \-\-help" ""
.IP
Print the usage message.
.HP
.BI "\-l" "" ", \-\-list" ""
.IP
For each spl.ko subsystem, print all available test names and
hexidecimal identifiers with a short description.
.HP
.BI "\-t" " subsystem" ":" "test" ", \-\-test" " subsystem" ":" "test"
.HP
.BI "\-t" " subsystem" ":all" "" ", \-\-test" " subsystem" ":all" ""
.IP
Run the \fItest\fR diagnostic routine for the spl.ko \fIsubsystem\fR.
Specify this option more than once to run multiple tests.

The \fItest\fR and \fIsubsystem\fR parameters are the names or
hexidecimal identifiers returned by the \fBsplat --list\fR command.

If \fIsubsystem\fR is a name and not a hexidecimal identifier, then the
\fBall\fR keyword can be used to run all available \fIsubsystem\fR
tests.

.HP
.BI "\-v" "" ", \-\-verbose" ""
.HP
.IP
Increase verbosity.
.HP
.BI "\-x" "" ", \-\-exit" ""
.IP
Stop running tests after the first failure.

.SH "EXAMPLES"
.LP
Test everything in the spl.ko kernel module:
.IP
# splat --all --verbose
.LP
Test the entire kernel memory subsystem:
.IP
# splat --test kmem:all
.LP
Test the kernel compression and queue waiting facilities:
.IP
# splat --test zlib:compress/uncompress --test taskq:wait
.LP
This is the same as the previous command, except that the subsystems
and tests are referenced by hexidecimal identifier instead of by name:
.IP
# splat -t 0x0f00:0x0f01 -t 0x0200:0x0204

.SH "NOTES"
All tests always return a green "Pass" result on a healthy system. Any
red "Fail" result should be investigated or reported.

.SH "BUGS"
Some tests can deadlock the kernel if an X11 desktop is running,
especially if a proprietary blob driver is loaded for the video
hardware.

.SH "AUTHORS"
This man page was written by Darik Horn <dajhorn@vanadac.com>.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR zpios (1),
.BR ztest (1)
