.\" $OpenBSD: tga.4,v 1.13 2013/04/17 02:28:40 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Nathan L. Binkert <binkertn@umich.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: April 17 2013 $
.Dt TGA 4 alpha
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tga
.Nd DECchip 21030 (TGA) graphics driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "tga* at pci?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at tga?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver handles DECchip 21030 (TGA) graphics hardware within the
.Xr wscons 4
console framework.
.Pp
On TGA adapters, the resolution is set on the card and is not changed
at runtime.
On some TGA models, there are four DIP switches.
On other models, there is a rotary switch with positions 0-F.
There are also some that use jumpers.
.Ss TGA Switch Settings
.Bl -column "Setting" "Freq (MHz)" "Resolution" "Rate (MHz)" -offset indent
.It Sy Switch Ta Sy Pixel Ta Sy Monitor Ta Sy Refresh
.It Sy "Setting" Ta Sy "Freq (MHz)" Ta Sy "Resolution" Ta Sy "Rate (MHz)"
.It Li 0 Ta 130 Ta 1280x1024 Ta 72
.It Li 1 Ta 119 Ta 1280x1024 Ta 66
.It Li 2 Ta 108 Ta 1280x1024 Ta 60
.It Li 3 Ta 104 Ta 1152x900 Ta 72
.It Li 4 Ta 93 Ta 1152x900 Ta 66
.It Li 5 Ta 75 Ta 1024x768 Ta 70
.It Li 6 Ta 74 Ta 1024x768 Ta 72
.It Li 7 Ta 69 Ta 1024x864 Ta 60
.It Li 8 Ta 65 Ta 1024x768 Ta 60
.It Li 9 Ta 50 Ta 800x600 Ta 72
.It Li A Ta 40 Ta 800x600 Ta 60
.It Li B Ta 32 Ta 640x480 Ta 72
.It Li C Ta 25 Ta 640x480 Ta 60
.El
.Pp
The settings for D, E, and F are for 1600x1200 on some cards, but
there are no guarantees.
.Pp
There are also a couple of extra jumpers on some cards.
One of these jumpers often selects the card to be the primary display.
Exactly one of the cards in your machine should have that jumper on.
If you have extra cards, they should have the jumper off.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4 ,
.Xr wsconscfg 8
.Rs
.%T DECchip 21030 PCI Graphics Accelerator Reference Manual
.%N EC-N0683-72
.Re
.Sh BUGS
There are some problems with the background randomly switching between
black and blue.
