.\"     $OpenBSD: tsc.4,v 1.10 2015/11/21 08:04:20 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Gregory McGarry.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 21 2015 $
.Dt TSC 4 alpha
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tsc ,
.Nm tsp
.Nd DECchip 21272 and 21274 Core Logic chipset
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "tsc* at mainbus?"
.Cd "tsciic* at tsc?"
.Cd "tsp* at tsc?"
.Cd "pci* at tsp?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the DECchip 21272 (Tsunami) and
21274 (Titan) Core Logic chipsets found on most 21264-based
systems.
.Pp
The
.Nm tsp
driver attaches to it and provides support for the DECchip 21272 and 21274
built-in PCI controller.
.Pp
DECchip 21272 provides one PCI bus, while DECchip 21274 provides two distinct
PCI buses, the second one with AGP capabilities.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.\".Xr mainbus 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr tsciic 4
.Sh BUGS
The AGP capabilities of the second PCI bus of DECchip 21274 are not currently
supported.
