'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2007,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: captoinfo.1m,v 1.25 2010/12/04 18:36:44 tom Exp $
.TH @CAPTOINFO@ 1M ""
.ds n 5
.ds d @TERMINFO@
.SH NAME
\fB@CAPTOINFO@\fR \- convert a \fItermcap\fR description into a \fIterminfo\fR description
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB@CAPTOINFO@\fR [\fB\-v\fR\fIn\fR \fIwidth\fR]  [\fB\-V\fR] [\fB\-1\fR] [\fB\-w\fR \fIwidth\fR] \fIfile\fR . . .
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB@CAPTOINFO@\fR looks in each given text
\fIfile\fR for \fBtermcap\fR descriptions.
For each
one found, an equivalent \fBterminfo\fR description is written to standard
output.
Termcap \fBtc\fR capabilities are translated directly to terminfo
\fBuse\fR capabilities.
.PP
If no \fIfile\fR is given, then the environment variable \fBTERMCAP\fR is used
for the filename or entry.
If \fBTERMCAP\fR is a full pathname to a file, only
the terminal whose name is specified in the environment variable \fBTERM\fR is
extracted from that file.
If the environment variable \fBTERMCAP\fR is not
set, then the file \fB\*d\fR is read.
.TP 5
\fB\-v\fR
print out tracing information on standard error as the program runs.
.TP 5
\fB\-V\fR
print out the version of the program in use on standard error and exit.
.TP 5
\fB\-1\fR
cause the fields to print out one to a line.
Otherwise, the fields
will be printed several to a line to a maximum width of 60
characters.
.TP 5
\fB\-w\fR
change the output to \fIwidth\fR characters.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
\*d
Compiled terminal description database.
.SH TRANSLATIONS FROM NONSTANDARD CAPABILITIES
.PP
Some obsolete nonstandard capabilities will automatically be translated
into standard (SVr4/XSI Curses) terminfo capabilities by \fB@CAPTOINFO@\fR.
Whenever one of these automatic translations is done, the program
will issue an notification to stderr, inviting the user to check that
it has not mistakenly translated a completely unknown and random
capability and/or syntax error.
.PP
.TS H
c c c c
c c c c
l l l l.
Nonstd	Std	From	Terminfo
name	name		capability
_
BO	mr	AT&T	enter_reverse_mode
CI	vi	AT&T	cursor_invisible
CV	ve	AT&T	cursor_normal
DS	mh	AT&T	enter_dim_mode
EE	me	AT&T	exit_attribute_mode
FE	LF	AT&T	label_on
FL	LO	AT&T	label_off
XS	mk	AT&T	enter_secure_mode
EN	@7	XENIX	key_end
GE	ae	XENIX	exit_alt_charset_mode
GS	as	XENIX	enter_alt_charset_mode
HM	kh	XENIX	key_home
LD	kL	XENIX	key_dl
PD	kN	XENIX	key_npage
PN	po	XENIX	prtr_off
PS	pf	XENIX	prtr_on
PU	kP	XENIX	key_ppage
RT	@8	XENIX	kent
UP	ku	XENIX	kcuu1
KA	k;	Tek	key_f10
KB	F1	Tek	key_f11
KC	F2	Tek	key_f12
KD	F3	Tek	key_f13
KE	F4	Tek	key_f14
KF	F5	Tek	key_f15
BC	Sb	Tek	set_background
FC	Sf	Tek	set_foreground
HS	mh	Iris	enter_dim_mode
.TE
.PP
XENIX termcap also used to have a set of extension capabilities
for forms drawing, designed to take advantage of the IBM PC
high-half graphics.
They were as follows:
.PP
.TS H
c c
l l.
Cap	Graphic
_
G2	upper left
G3	lower left
G1	upper right
G4	lower right
GR	pointing right
GL	pointing left
GU	pointing up
GD	pointing down
GH	horizontal line
GV	vertical line
GC	intersection
G6	upper left
G7	lower left
G5	upper right
G8	lower right
Gr	tee pointing right
Gr	tee pointing left
Gu	tee pointing up
Gd	tee pointing down
Gh	horizontal line
Gv	vertical line
Gc	intersection
GG	acs magic cookie count
.TE
.PP
If the single-line capabilities occur in an entry, they will automatically
be composed into an \fIacsc\fR string.
The double-line capabilities and
\fBGG\fR are discarded with a warning message.
.PP
IBM's AIX has a terminfo facility descended from SVr1 terminfo but incompatible
with the SVr4 format.
The following AIX extensions are automatically
translated:
.TS
c c
l l.
IBM	XSI
_
ksel	kslt
kbtab	kcbt
font0	s0ds
font1	s1ds
font2	s2ds
font3	s3ds
.TE
.PP
Additionally, the AIX \fIbox1\fR capability will be automatically translated to
an \fIacsc\fR string.
.PP
Hewlett-Packard's terminfo library supports two nonstandard terminfo
capabilities \fImeml\fR (memory lock) and \fImemu\fR (memory unlock).
These will be discarded with a warning message.
.SH NOTES
This utility is actually a link to \fB@TIC@\fR(1M), running in \fI\-I\fR mode.
You can use other \fB@TIC@\fR options such as \fB\-f\fR and  \fB\-x\fR.
.PP
The trace option is not identical to SVr4's.
Under SVr4, instead of following
the \fB\-v\fR with a trace level n, you repeat it n times.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB@INFOCMP@\fR(1M),
\fBcurses\fR(3X),
\fBterminfo\fR(\*n)
.PP
This describes \fBncurses\fR
version @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@ (patch @NCURSES_PATCH@).
.SH AUTHOR
Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>
and
.br
Thomas E. Dickey <dickey@invisible-island.net>
