'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2010,2011 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_addch.3x,v 1.32 2011/01/15 14:15:10 tom Exp $
.TH curs_addch 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBaddch\fR,
\fBwaddch\fR,
\fBmvaddch\fR,
\fBmvwaddch\fR,
\fBechochar\fR,
\fBwechochar\fR \- add a character (with attributes) to a \fBcurses\fR window, then advance the cursor
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <curses.h>\fR
.PP
\fBint addch(const chtype ch);\fR
.br
\fBint waddch(WINDOW *win, const chtype ch);\fR
.br
\fBint mvaddch(int y, int x, const chtype ch);\fR
.br
\fBint mvwaddch(WINDOW *win, int y, int x, const chtype ch);\fR
.br
\fBint echochar(const chtype ch);\fR
.br
\fBint wechochar(WINDOW *win, const chtype ch);\fR
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBaddch\fR, \fBwaddch\fR, \fBmvaddch\fR and \fBmvwaddch\fR routines put
the character \fIch\fR into the given window at its current window position,
which is then advanced.  They are analogous to \fBputchar\fR in \fBstdio\fR(3).
If the advance is at the right margin, the cursor automatically wraps to the
beginning of the next line.  At the bottom of the current scrolling region, if
\fBscrollok\fR is enabled, the scrolling region is scrolled up one line.
.PP
If \fIch\fR is a tab, newline, or backspace,
the cursor is moved appropriately within the window.
Backspace moves the cursor one character left; at the left
edge of a window it does nothing.
Newline does a \fBclrtoeol\fR,
then moves the cursor to the window left margin on the next line,
scrolling the window if on the last line.
Tabs are considered to be at every eighth column.
The tab interval may be altered by setting the \fBTABSIZE\fR variable.
.PP
If \fIch\fR is any control character other than tab, newline, or backspace, it
is drawn in \fB^\fR\fIX\fR notation.  Calling \fBwinch\fR after adding a
control character does not return the character itself, but instead returns
the ^-representation of the control character.
.PP
Video attributes can be combined with a character argument passed to
\fBaddch\fR or related functions by logical-ORing them into the character.
(Thus, text, including attributes, can be copied from one place to another
using \fBinch\fR and \fBaddch\fR.)  See the \fBcurs_attr\fR(3X) page for
values of predefined video attribute constants that can be usefully OR'ed
into characters.
.PP
The \fBechochar\fR and \fBwechochar\fR routines are equivalent to a call to
\fBaddch\fR followed by a call to \fBrefresh\fR, or a call to \fBwaddch\fR
followed by a call to \fBwrefresh\fR.  The knowledge that only a single
character is being output is used and, for non-control characters, a
considerable performance gain may be seen by using these routines instead of
their equivalents.
.SS Line Graphics
The following variables may be used to add line drawing characters to the
screen with routines of the \fBaddch\fR family.  The default character listed
below is used if the \fBacsc\fR capability does not define a terminal-specific
replacement for it.
The names are taken from VT100 nomenclature.
.PP
.TS
l l l
_ _ _
l l l.
\fIName\fR	\fIDefault\fR	\fIDescription\fR
ACS_BLOCK	#	solid square block
ACS_BOARD	#	board of squares
ACS_BTEE	+	bottom tee
ACS_BULLET	o	bullet
ACS_CKBOARD	:	checker board (stipple)
ACS_DARROW	v	arrow pointing down
ACS_DEGREE	'	degree symbol
ACS_DIAMOND	+	diamond
ACS_GEQUAL	>	greater-than-or-equal-to
ACS_HLINE	\-	horizontal line
ACS_LANTERN	#	lantern symbol
ACS_LARROW	<	arrow pointing left
ACS_LEQUAL	<	less-than-or-equal-to
ACS_LLCORNER	+	lower left-hand corner
ACS_LRCORNER	+	lower right-hand corner
ACS_LTEE	+	left tee
ACS_NEQUAL	!	not-equal
ACS_PI	*	greek pi
ACS_PLMINUS	#	plus/minus
ACS_PLUS	+	plus
ACS_RARROW	>	arrow pointing right
ACS_RTEE	+	right tee
ACS_S1	\-	scan line 1
ACS_S3	\-	scan line 3
ACS_S7	\-	scan line 7
ACS_S9	\&_	scan line 9
ACS_STERLING	f	pound-sterling symbol
ACS_TTEE	+	top tee
ACS_UARROW	^	arrow pointing up
ACS_ULCORNER	+	upper left-hand corner
ACS_URCORNER	+	upper right-hand corner
ACS_VLINE	|	vertical line
.TE
.SH RETURN VALUE
All routines return the integer \fBERR\fR upon failure and \fBOK\fR on success
(the SVr4 manuals specify only "an integer value other than \fBERR\fR") upon
successful completion, unless otherwise noted in the preceding routine
descriptions.
.PP
Functions with a "mv" prefix first perform a cursor movement using
\fBwmove\fP, and return an error if the position is outside the window,
or if the window pointer is null.
.SH NOTES
Note that \fBaddch\fR, \fBmvaddch\fR, \fBmvwaddch\fR, and
\fBechochar\fR may be macros.
.SH PORTABILITY
All these functions are described in the XSI Curses standard, Issue 4.
The defaults specified for forms-drawing characters apply in the POSIX locale.
.LP
X/Open Curses states that the \fIACS_\fP definitions are \fBchar\fP constants.
For the wide-character implementation (see \fBcurs_add_wch\fP),
there are analogous \fIWACS_\fP definitions which are \fBcchar_t\fP constants.
.LP
Some ACS symbols
(ACS_S3,
ACS_S7,
ACS_LEQUAL,
ACS_GEQUAL,
ACS_PI,
ACS_NEQUAL,
ACS_STERLING)
were not documented in
any publicly released System V.  However, many publicly available terminfos
include \fBacsc\fR strings in which their key characters (pryz{|}) are
embedded, and a second-hand list of their character descriptions has come
to light.  The ACS-prefixed names for them were invented for \fBncurses\fR(3X).
.LP
The \fBTABSIZE\fR variable is implemented in some versions of curses,
but is not part of X/Open curses.
.LP
If \fIch\fR is a carriage return,
the cursor is moved to the beginning of the current row of the window.
This is true of other implementations, but is not documented.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_attr\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_clear\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_inch\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_outopts\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_refresh\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_variables\fR(3X),
\fBputc\fR(3).
.PP
Comparable functions in the wide-character (ncursesw) library are
described in
\fBcurs_add_wch\fR(3X).
