.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 2002-2006,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_ins_wch.3x,v 1.5 2010/12/04 18:38:55 tom Exp $
.TH curs_ins_wch 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBins_wch\fR,
\fBmvins_wch\fR,
\fBmvwins_wch\fR,
\fBwins_wch\fR \- insert a complex character and rendition into a window
.SH SYNOPSIS
#include <curses.h>
.sp
\fBint ins_wch(const cchar_t *\fR\fIwch\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint wins_wch(WINDOW *\fR\fIwin, const cchar_t *\fR\fIwch\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint mvins_wch(int \fR\fIy, int \fR\fIx, const cchar_t *\fR\fIwch\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint mvwins_wch(WINDOW *\fR\fIwin, int \fR\fIy, int \fR\fIx, const cchar_t *\fR\fIwch\fR\fB);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
These routines, insert the complex character \fIwch\fR with rendition
before the character under the cursor.
All characters to the right of the cursor are moved one space to the right,
with the possibility of the rightmost character on the line being lost.
The insertion operation does not change the cursor position.
.SH RETURN VALUE
If successful, these functions return OK.
If not, they return ERR.
.PP
Functions with a "mv" prefix first perform a cursor movement using
\fBwmove\fP, and return an error if the position is outside the window,
or if the window pointer is null.
.SH ERRORS
No errors are defined.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_insch\fR(3X).
