.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 2007,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_legacy.3x,v 1.5 2010/12/04 18:38:55 tom Exp $
.TH curs_legacy 3X ""
.SH NAME
getattrs \- get \fBcurses\fR cursor and window coordinates, attributes
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <curses.h>\fR
.sp
\fBint getattrs(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getbegx(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getbegy(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getcurx(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getcury(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getmaxx(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getmaxy(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getparx(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint getpary(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBgetbegy\fR and \fBgetbegx\fR functions return the same
data as \fBgetbegyx\fR.
.PP
The \fBgetcury\fR and \fBgetcurx\fR functions return the same
data as \fBgetyx\fR.
.PP
The \fBgetmaxy\fR and \fBgetmaxx\fR functions return the same
data as \fBgetmaxyx\fR.
.PP
The \fBgetpary\fR and \fBgetparx\fR functions return the same
data as \fBgetparyx\fR.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These functions return an integer,
or ERR if the window parameter is null.
.SH NOTES
All of these interfaces are provided as macros and functions.
The macros are suppressed (and only the functions provided)
when \fBNCURSES_OPAQUE\fR is defined.
The standard forms such as \fBgetyx\fP must be implemented as macros,
and (in this implementation) are defined in terms of the functions
described here,
to avoid reliance on internal details of the WINDOW structure.
.SH PORTABILITY
These functions were supported on Version 7, BSD or System V implementations.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_getyx\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_opaque\fR(3X)
