.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2006,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_delch.3x,v 1.11 2010/12/04 18:36:44 tom Exp $
.TH curs_delch 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBdelch\fR,
\fBwdelch\fR,
\fBmvdelch\fR,
\fBmvwdelch\fR \- delete character under the cursor in a \fBcurses\fR window
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <curses.h>\fR
.sp
\fBint delch(void);\fR
.br
\fBint wdelch(WINDOW *win);\fR
.br
\fBint mvdelch(int y, int x);\fR
.br
\fBint mvwdelch(WINDOW *win, int y, int x);\fR
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
These routines delete the character under the cursor; all characters to the
right of the cursor on the same line are moved to the left one position and the
last character on the line is filled with a blank.  The cursor position does
not change (after moving to \fIy\fR, \fIx\fR, if specified).  (This does not
imply use of the hardware delete character feature.)
.SH RETURN VALUE
All routines return the integer \fBERR\fR upon failure and an \fBOK\fR (SVr4
specifies only "an integer value other than \fBERR\fR") upon successful
completion.
.PP
Functions with a "mv" prefix first perform a cursor movement using
\fBwmove\fP, and return an error if the position is outside the window,
or if the window pointer is null.
.SH NOTES
Note that \fBdelch\fR, \fBmvdelch\fR, and \fBmvwdelch\fR may be macros.
.SH PORTABILITY
These functions are described in the XSI Curses standard, Issue 4.  The
standard specifies that they return \fBERR\fR on failure, but specifies no
error conditions.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X)
