.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 2002-2010,2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_in_wchstr.3x,v 1.9 2012/11/03 23:03:59 tom Exp $
.TH curs_in_wchstr 3X ""
.na
.hy 0
.SH NAME
\fBin_wchstr\fR,
\fBin_wchnstr\fR,
\fBwin_wchstr\fR,
\fBwin_wchnstr\fR,
\fBmvin_wchstr\fR,
\fBmvin_wchnstr\fR,
\fBmvwin_wchstr\fR,
\fBmvwin_wchnstr\fR \- get an array of complex characters and renditions from a curses window
.ad
.hy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>\fR
.sp
\fBint in_wchstr(cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint in_wchnstr(cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR\fB, int \fR\fIn\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint win_wchstr(WINDOW *\fR\fIwin\fR\fB, cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint win_wchnstr(WINDOW *\fR\fIwin\fR\fB, cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR\fB, int \fR\fIn\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint mvin_wchstr(int \fR\fIy\fR\fB, int \fR\fIx\fR\fB, cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint mvin_wchnstr(int \fR\fIy\fR\fB, int \fR\fIx\fR\fB, cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR\fB, int \fR\fIn\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint mvwin_wchstr(WINDOW *\fR\fIwin\fR\fB, int \fR\fIy\fR\fB, int \fR\fIx\fR\fB, cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR\fB);\fR
.br
\fBint mvwin_wchnstr(WINDOW *\fR\fIwin\fR\fB, int \fR\fIy\fR\fB, int \fR\fIx\fR\fB, cchar_t *\fR\fIwchstr\fR, int \fIn\fR\fB);\fR
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions return an array of complex characters in \fIwchstr\fR,
starting at the current cursor position in the named window.
Attributes (rendition) are stored with the characters.
.PP
The
\fBin_wchnstr\fR,
\fBmvin_wchnstr\fR,
\fBmvwin_wchnstr\fR
and
\fBwin_wchnstr\fR
fill the array
with at most
\fIn\fR
\fBcchar_t\fR
elements.
.br
.SH NOTES
Note that all routines except
\fBwin_wchnstr\fR
may be
macros.
.PP
Reading a line that overflows the array pointed to by
\fIwchstr\fR
with
\fBin_wchstr\fR,
\fBmvin_wchstr\fR,
\fBmvwin_wchstr\fR
or
\fBwin_wchstr\fR
causes undefined results. Therefore, the use of
\fBin_wchnstr\fR,
\fBmvin_wchnstr\fR,
\fBmvwin_wchnstr\fR, or
\fBwin_wchnstr\fR
is recommended.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Upon successful completion, these functions return
\fBOK\fR.
Otherwise, they return
\fBERR\fR.
.PP
Functions with a "mv" prefix first perform a cursor movement using
\fBwmove\fP, and return an error if the position is outside the window,
or if the window pointer is null.
.SH PORTABILITY
The XSI Curses defines no error conditions.
This implementation checks for null pointers,
returning ERR in that case.
.SH SEE ALSO
Functions:
\fBcurses\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_in_wch\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_instr\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_inwstr\fR(3X)
\fBcurs_inchstr\fR(3X)
