.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 2008,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_memleaks.3x,v 1.3 2010/12/04 18:40:45 tom Exp $
.TH curs_memleaks 3X ""
.na
.hy 0
.SH NAME
\fB_nc_freeall\fP
\fB_nc_free_and_exit\fP \- \fBcurses\fR memory-leak checking
.ad
.hy
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <curses.h>\fR
.sp
\fBvoid _nc_freeall(void);\fR
.br
\fBvoid _nc_free_and_exit(int);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions are used to simplify analysis of memory leaks in the ncurses
library.
They are normally not available; they must be configured into the library
at build time using the \fB\-\-disable-leaks\fP option.
That compiles-in code that frees memory that normally would not be freed.
.PP
Any implementation of curses must not free the memory associated with
a screen, since (even after calling \fBendwin\fP), it must be available
for use in the next call to \fBrefresh\fP.
There are also chunks of memory held for performance reasons.
That makes it hard to analyze curses applications for memory leaks.
To work around this, one can build a debugging version of the ncurses
library which frees those chunks which it can, and provides these
functions to free all of the memory allocated by the ncurses library.
.PP
The \fP_nc_free_and_exit\fP function is the preferred one since
some of the memory which is freed may be required for the application
to continue running.
Its parameter is the code to pass to the \fPexit\fP routine.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These functions do not return a value.
.SH PORTABILITY
These functions are not part of the XSI interface.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X).
