'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2007,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: form_opts.3x,v 1.11 2010/12/04 18:40:45 tom Exp $
.TH form_opts 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBform_opts\fR \- set and get form options
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <form.h>\fR
.br
int set_form_opts(FORM *form, Field_Options opts);
.br
int form_opts_on(FORM *form, Field_Options opts);
.br
int form_opts_off(FORM *form, Field_Options opts);
.br
Field_Options form_opts(const FORM *form);
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function \fBset_form_opts\fR sets all the given form's option bits (form
option bits may be logically-OR'ed together).
.PP
The function \fBform_opts_on\fR turns on the given option bits, and leaves
others alone.
.PP
The function \fBform_opts_off\fR turns off the given option bits, and leaves
others alone.
.PP
The function \fBform_opts\fR returns the form's current option bits.
.PP
The following options are defined (all are on by default):
.TP 5
O_NL_OVERLOAD
Overload the \fBREQ_NEW_LINE\fR forms driver request so that calling it at the
end of a field goes to the next field.
.TP 5
O_BS_OVERLOAD
Overload the \fBREQ_DEL_PREV\fR forms driver request so that calling it at the
beginning of a field goes to the previous field.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Except for \fBform_opts\fR, each routine returns one of the following:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X), \fBform\fR(3X).
.SH NOTES
The header file \fB<form.h>\fR automatically includes the header file
\fB<curses.h>\fR.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V forms library.  They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.  Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric
S. Raymond.
