'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2006,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: form_field_attributes.3x,v 1.12 2010/12/04 18:40:45 tom Exp $
.TH form_field_attributes 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBform_field_attributes\fR \- color and attribute control for form fields
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <form.h>\fR
.br
int set_field_fore(FIELD *field, chtype attr);
.br
chtype field_fore(const FIELD *field);
.br
int set_field_back(FIELD *field, chtype attr);
.br
chtype field_back(const FIELD *field);
.br
int set_field_pad(FIELD *field, int pad);
.br
int field_pad(const FIELD *field);
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function \fBset_field_fore\fR sets the foreground attribute of
\fIfield\fR. This is the highlight used to display the field contents.  The
function \fBfield_fore\fR returns the foreground attribute.  The default is
\fBA_STANDOUT\fR.
.PP
The function \fBset_field_back\fR sets the background attribute of
\fIform\fR. This is the highlight used to display the extent fields in the
form.  The function \fBfield_back\fR returns the background attribute.  The
default is \fBA_NORMAL\fR.
.PP
The function \fBset_field_pad\fR sets the character used to fill the field.
The function \fBfield_pad\fR returns the given form's pad character.  The
default is a blank.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These routines return one of the following:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_ARGUMENT
Routine detected an incorrect or out-of-range argument.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fR).
.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X) and related pages whose names begin "form_" for detailed
descriptions of the entry points.
.SH NOTES
The header file \fB<form.h>\fR automatically includes the header file
\fB<curses.h>\fR.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V forms library.  They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.  Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric
S. Raymond.
