.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 2010,2013 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: form_variables.3x,v 1.4 2013/06/22 17:58:32 tom Exp $
.TH form_variables 3X ""
.ds n 5
.na
.hy 0
.SH NAME
\fBTYPE_ALNUM\fR,
\fBTYPE_ALPHA\fR,
\fBTYPE_ENUM\fR,
\fBTYPE_INTEGER\fR,
\fBTYPE_IPV4\fR,
\fBTYPE_NUMERIC\fR,
\fBTYPE_REGEXP\fR
\- form system global variables
.ad
.hy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <form.h>\fR
.PP
\fBFIELDTYPE * TYPE_ALNUM;\fR
\fBFIELDTYPE * TYPE_ALPHA;\fR
\fBFIELDTYPE * TYPE_ENUM;\fR
\fBFIELDTYPE * TYPE_INTEGER;\fR
\fBFIELDTYPE * TYPE_IPV4;\fR
\fBFIELDTYPE * TYPE_NUMERIC;\fR
\fBFIELDTYPE * TYPE_REGEXP;\fR
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These are building blocks for the form library,
defining fields that can be created using \fBset_fieldtype\fP(3X).
Each provides functions for field- and character-validation,
according to the given datatype.
.SS TYPE_ALNUM
This holds alphanumeric data.
.SS TYPE_ALPHA
This holds alphabetic data.
.SS TYPE_ENUM
This holds an enumerated type.
.SS TYPE_INTEGER
This holds a decimal integer.
.SS TYPE_IPV4
This holds an IPv4 internet address, e.g., "127.0.0.1".
.SS TYPE_NUMERIC
This holds a decimal number, with optional sign and decimal point.
.SS TYPE_REGEXP
This holds a regular expression.
.SH PORTABILITY
The \fBTYPE_IPV4\fP variable is an extension not provided by older
implementations of the form library.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBform\fR(3X).
