.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 2003-2006,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" Author: Thomas E. Dickey 2003
.\"
.\" $Id: key_defined.3x,v 1.6 2010/12/04 18:40:45 tom Exp $
.TH key_defined 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBkey_defined\fP \- check if a keycode is defined
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <curses.h>\fP
.sp
\fBint key_defined(const char *definition);\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is an extension to the curses library.
It permits an application to determine if a string is currently bound
to any keycode.
.SH RETURN VALUE
If the string is bound to a keycode, its value (greater than zero) is returned.
If no keycode is bound, zero is returned.
If the string conflicts with longer strings which are bound to keys, \-1 is returned.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines are specific to ncurses.  They were not supported on
Version 7, BSD or System V implementations.  It is recommended that
any code depending on them be conditioned using NCURSES_VERSION.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBdefine_key\fR(3X).
.SH AUTHOR
Thomas Dickey.
