.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1999-2008,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" Author: Thomas E. Dickey 1999
.\"
.\" $Id: keybound.3x,v 1.8 2010/12/04 18:49:20 tom Exp $
.TH keybound 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBkeybound\fP \- return definition of keycode
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <curses.h>\fP
.sp
\fBchar * keybound(int keycode, int count);\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is an extension to the curses library.
It permits an application to determine the string which is defined
in the terminfo for specific keycodes.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The \fIkeycode\fP parameter must be greater than zero, else NULL is returned.
If it does not correspond to a defined key, then NULL is returned.
The \fIcount\fP parameter is used to allow the application to iterate
through multiple definitions, counting from zero.
When successful,
the function returns a string which must be freed by the caller.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines are specific to ncurses.  They were not supported on
Version 7, BSD or System V implementations.  It is recommended that
any code depending on them be conditioned using NCURSES_VERSION.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBdefine_key\fR(3X),
\fBkeyok\fR(3X).
.SH AUTHOR
Thomas Dickey.
