.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2008,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: menu_pattern.3x,v 1.13 2010/12/04 18:40:45 tom Exp $
.TH menu_pattern 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBmenu_pattern\fR \- get and set a menu's pattern buffer
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <menu.h>\fR
.br
int set_menu_pattern(MENU *menu, const char *pattern);
.br
char *menu_pattern(const MENU *menu);
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
Every menu has an associated pattern match buffer.  As input events that are
printable characters come in, they are appended to this match buffer
and tested for a match, as described in \fBmenu_driver\fR(3X).
.PP
The function \fBset_menu_pattern\fR sets the pattern buffer for the given menu
and tries to find the first matching item.  If it succeeds, that item becomes
current; if not, the current item does not change. 
.PP
The function \fBmenu_pattern\fR returns the pattern buffer of the given
\fImenu\fR.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The function \fBmenu_pattern\fR returns a pointer, which is \fBNULL\fR if the \fImenu\fP parameter is \fBNULL\fP.
Otherwise, it is a pointer to a string which is empty if no pattern has been set.
It does not set errno.
.PP
The function \fBset_menu_pattern\fR may return the following error codes:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_ARGUMENT
Routine detected an incorrect or out-of-range argument.
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_STATE
Routine was called from an initialization or termination function.
.TP 5
.B E_NOT_CONNECTED
No items are connected to menu.
.TP 5
.B E_NO_MATCH
Character failed to match.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X), \fBmenu\fR(3X).
.SH NOTES
The header file \fB<menu.h>\fR automatically includes the header file
\fB<curses.h>\fR.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V menu library.  They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.  Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric
S. Raymond.
