'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2006,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: menu_format.3x,v 1.12 2010/12/04 18:40:45 tom Exp $
.TH menu_format 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBmenu_format\fR \- set and get menu sizes
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <menu.h>\fR
.br
int set_menu_format(MENU *menu, int rows, int cols);
.br
void menu_format(const MENU *menu, int *rows, int *cols);
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function \fBset_menu_format\fR sets the maximum display size of the given
menu.  If this size is too small to display all menu items, the menu will be
made scrollable. If this size is larger than the menus subwindow and the
subwindow is too small to display all menu items, \fBpost_menu()\fR will fail.
.PP
The default format is 16 rows, 1 column.  Calling \fBset_menu_format\fR with a
null menu pointer will change this default.  A zero row or column argument to
\fBset_menu_format\fR is interpreted as a request not to change the current
value.
.PP
The function \fBmenu_format\fR returns the maximum-size constraints for the
given menu into the storage addressed by \fBrows\fR and \fBcols\fR.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These routines returns one of the following:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fR).
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_ARGUMENT
Routine detected an incorrect or out-of-range argument.
.TP 5
.B E_POSTED
The menu is already posted.
.TP 5
.B E_NOT_CONNECTED
No items are connected to the menu.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X), \fBmenu\fR(3X).
.SH NOTES
The header file \fB<menu.h>\fR automatically includes the header file
\fB<curses.h>\fR.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V menu library.  They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.  Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric
S. Raymond.
