'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2010,2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: menu_items.3x,v 1.10 2012/11/03 23:03:59 tom Exp $
.TH menu_items 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBmenu_items\fR \- make and break connections between items and menus
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <menu.h>\fR
.br
int set_menu_items(MENU *menu, ITEM **items);
.br
ITEM **menu_items(const MENU *menu);
.br
int item_count(const MENU *menu);
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function \fBset_menu_items\fR changes the item pointer array of the given
\fImenu\fR.  The array must be terminated by a \fBNULL\fR.
.PP
The function \fBmenu_items\fR returns the item array of the given menu.
.PP
The function \fBitem_count\fR returns the count of items in \fImenu\fR.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The function \fBmenu_items\fR returns a pointer (which may be \fBNULL\fR).
It does not set errno.
.PP
The function \fBitem_count\fR returns \fBERR\fR (the general \fBcurses\fR error
return value) if its \fImenu\fP parameter is \fBNULL\fP.
.PP
The function \fBset_menu_items\fR returns one of the following codes on error:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_ARGUMENT
Routine detected an incorrect or out-of-range argument.
.TP 5
.B E_NOT_CONNECTED
No items are connected to the menu.
.TP 5
.B E_POSTED
The menu is already posted.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fR).
.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X), \fBmenu\fR(3X).
.SH NOTES
The header file \fB<menu.h>\fR automatically includes the header file
\fB<curses.h>\fR.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V menu library.  They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.PP
The SVr4 menu library documentation specifies the \fBitem_count\fR error value
as \-1 (which is the value of \fBERR\fR).
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.  Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric
S. Raymond.
