@c $Id$

@node  Acknowledgments, Copyrights and Licenses, Migration, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@appendix Acknowledgments

Eric Young wrote ``libdes''. Heimdal used to use libdes, without it
kth-krb would never have existed. Since there are no longer any Eric
Young code left in the library, we renamed it to libhcrypto.

All functions in libhcrypto have been re-implemented or used available
public domain code. The core AES function where written by Vincent
Rijmen, Antoon Bosselaers and Paulo Barreto.  The core DES SBOX
transformation was written by Richard Outerbridge. @code{imath} that
is used for public key crypto support is written by Michael
J. Fromberger.

The University of California at Berkeley initially wrote @code{telnet},
and @code{telnetd}.  The authentication and encryption code of
@code{telnet} and @code{telnetd} was added by David Borman (then of Cray
Research, Inc).  The encryption code was removed when this was exported
and then added back by Juha Eskelinen.

The @code{popper} was also a Berkeley program initially.

Some of the functions in @file{libroken} also come from Berkeley by way
of NetBSD/FreeBSD.

@code{editline} was written by Simmule Turner and Rich Salz. Heimdal
contains a modifed copy.

The @code{getifaddrs} implementation for Linux was written by Hideaki
YOSHIFUJI for the Usagi project.

The @code{pkcs11.h} headerfile was written by the Scute project.

Bugfixes, documentation, encouragement, and code has been contributed by:
@table @asis
@item Alexander Boström
@item Allan McRae
@item Andrew Bartlett
@item Andrew Cobaugh
@item Andrew Tridge
@item Anton Lundin
@item Asanka Herath
@item Björn Grönvall
@item Björn Sandell
@item Björn Schlögl
@item Brandon S. Allbery KF8NH
@item Brian A May
@item Buck Huppmann
@item Cacdric Schieli
@item Chaskiel M Grundman
@item Christos Zoulas
@item Cizzi Storm
@item Daniel Kouril
@item David Love
@item David Markey
@item David R Boldt
@item Derrick J Brashear
@item Donald Norwood
@item Douglas E Engert
@item Frank van der Linden
@item Gabor Gombas
@item Guido Günther
@item Guillaume Rousse
@item Harald Barth
@item Ingo Schwarze
@item Jacques A. Vidrine
@item Jaideep Padhye
@item Jan Rekorajski
@item Jason McIntyre
@item Jeffrey Altman
@item Jelmer Vernooij
@item Joerg Pulz
@item Johan Danielsson
@item Johan Gadsjö
@item Johan Ihrén
@item John Center
@item Jun-ichiro itojun Hagino
@item KAMADA Ken'ichi
@item Kamen Mazdrashki
@item Karolin Seeger
@item Ken Hornstein
@item Love Hörnquist Åstrand
@item Luke Howard
@item Magnus Ahltorp
@item Magnus Holmberg
@item Marc Horowitz
@item Mario Strasser
@item Mark Eichin
@item Martin von Gagern
@item Matthias Dieter Wallnöfer
@item Matthieu Patou
@item Mattias Amnefelt
@item Michael B Allen
@item Michael Fromberger
@item Michal Vocu
@item Milosz Kmieciak
@item Miroslav Ruda
@item Mustafa A. Hashmi
@item Nicolas Williams
@item Patrik Lundin
@item Petr Holub
@item Phil Fisher
@item Rafal Malinowski
@item Ragnar Sundblad
@item Rainer Toebbicke
@item Richard Nyberg
@item Roland C. Dowdeswell
@item Roman Divacky
@item Russ Allbery
@item Sho Hosoda, 細田 将
@item Simon Wilkinson
@item Stefan Metzmacher
@item Ted Percival
@item Tom Payerle
@item Victor Guerra
@item Zeqing Xia
@item Åke Sandgren 
@item and we hope that those not mentioned here will forgive us.
@end table

All bugs were introduced by ourselves.
