@c $Id$

@node Introduction, What is Kerberos?, Top, Top
@c @node Introduction, What is Kerberos?, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Introduction

@heading What is Heimdal?

Heimdal is a free implementation of Kerberos 5. The goals are to:

@itemize @bullet
@item
have an implementation that can be freely used by anyone
@item
be protocol compatible with existing implementations and, if not in
conflict, with RFC 4120 (and any future updated RFC). RFC 4120
replaced RFC 1510.
@item
be reasonably compatible with the M.I.T Kerberos V5 API
@item
have support for Kerberos V5 over GSS-API (RFC1964)
@item
include the most important and useful application programs (rsh, telnet,
popper, etc.)
@item
include enough backwards compatibility with Kerberos V4
@end itemize

@heading Status

Heimdal has the following features (this does not mean any of this
works):

@itemize @bullet
@item
a stub generator and a library to encode/decode/whatever ASN.1/DER
stuff
@item
a @code{libkrb5} library that should be possible to get to work with
simple applications
@item
a GSS-API library
@item
@file{kinit}, @file{klist}, @file{kdestroy}
@item
@file{telnet}, @file{telnetd}
@item
@file{rsh}, @file{rshd}
@item
@file{popper}, @file{push} (a movemail equivalent)
@item
@file{ftp}, and @file{ftpd}
@item
a library @file{libkafs} for authenticating to AFS and a program
@file{afslog} that uses it
@item
some simple test programs
@item
a KDC that supports most things,
@item
simple programs for distributing databases between a KDC master and
slaves
@item
a password changing daemon @file{kpasswdd}, library functions for
changing passwords and a simple client
@item
some kind of administration system
@item
Kerberos V4 support in many of the applications.
@end itemize

@heading Bug reports

If you find bugs in this software, make sure it is a genuine bug and not
just a part of the code that isn't implemented.

Bug reports should be sent to @email{heimdal-bugs@@h5l.org}. Please
include information on what machine and operating system (including
version) you are running, what you are trying to do, what happens, what
you think should have happened, an example for us to repeat, the output
you get when trying the example, and a patch for the problem if you have
one. Please make any patches with @code{diff -u} or @code{diff -c}.

Suggestions, comments and other non bug reports are also welcome.

@heading Mailing list

There are two mailing lists with talk about
Heimdal. @email{heimdal-announce@@sics.se} is a low-volume announcement
list, while @email{heimdal-discuss@@sics.se} is for general discussion.
Send a message to @email{majordomo@@sics.se} to subscribe.

@heading Heimdal source code, binaries and the manual

The source code for heimdal, links to binaries and the manual (this
document) can be found on our web-page at
@url{http://www.pdc.kth.se/heimdal/}.
