.TH "hcrypto function controlling behavior" 3 "11 Jan 2012" "Version 1.5.2" "Heimdal crypto library" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
hcrypto function controlling behavior \- 
.SS "Functions"

.in +1c
.ti -1c
.RI "int \fBEVP_CIPHER_CTX_rand_key\fP (EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx, void *key)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "int \fBEVP_CIPHER_CTX_ctrl\fP (EVP_CIPHER_CTX *ctx, int type, int arg, void *data)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "void \fBOpenSSL_add_all_algorithms\fP (void)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "void \fBOpenSSL_add_all_algorithms_conf\fP (void)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "void \fBOpenSSL_add_all_algorithms_noconf\fP (void)"
.br
.in -1c
.SH "Detailed Description"
.PP 

.SH "Function Documentation"
.PP 
.SS "int EVP_CIPHER_CTX_ctrl (EVP_CIPHER_CTX * ctx, int type, int arg, void * data)"
.PP
Perform a operation on a ctx
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIctx\fP context to perform operation on. 
.br
\fItype\fP type of operation. 
.br
\fIarg\fP argument to operation. 
.br
\fIdata\fP addition data to operation.
.RE
.PP
\fBReturns:\fP
.RS 4
1 for success, 0 for failure. 
.RE
.PP

.SS "int EVP_CIPHER_CTX_rand_key (EVP_CIPHER_CTX * ctx, void * key)"
.PP
Generate a random key for the specificed EVP_CIPHER.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIctx\fP EVP_CIPHER_CTX type to build the key for. 
.br
\fIkey\fP return key, must be at least \fBEVP_CIPHER_key_length()\fP byte long.
.RE
.PP
\fBReturns:\fP
.RS 4
1 for success, 0 for failure. 
.RE
.PP

.SS "void OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms (void)"
.PP
Add all algorithms to the crypto core. 
.SS "void OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms_conf (void)"
.PP
Add all algorithms to the crypto core using configuration file. 
.SS "void OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms_noconf (void)"
.PP
Add all algorithms to the crypto core, but don't use the configuration file. 
