Documentation/admin-guide/LSM/apparmor.rst, before:

========
AppArmor
========

What is AppArmor?
=================

AppArmor is MAC style security extension for the Linux kernel.  It implements
a task centered policy, with task "profiles" being created and loaded
from user space.  Tasks on the system that do not have a profile defined for
them run in an unconfined state which is equivalent to standard Linux DAC
permissions.

How to enable/disable
=====================

set ``CONFIG_SECURITY_APPARMOR=y``

If AppArmor should be selected as the default security module then set::

   CONFIG_DEFAULT_SECURITY="apparmor"
   CONFIG_SECURITY_APPARMOR_BOOTPARAM_VALUE=1

Build the kernel

If AppArmor is not the default security module it can be enabled by passing
``security=apparmor`` on the kernel's command line.

If AppArmor is the default security module it can be disabled by passing
``apparmor=0, security=XXXX`` (where ``XXXX`` is valid security module), on the
kernel's command line.

For AppArmor to enforce any restrictions beyond standard Linux DAC permissions
policy must be loaded into the kernel from user space (see the Documentation
and tools links).

Documentation
=============

Documentation can be found on the wiki, linked below.

Links
=====

Mailing List - apparmor@lists.ubuntu.com

Wiki - http://wiki.apparmor.net

User space tools - https://gitlab.com/apparmor

Kernel module - git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/jj/linux-apparmor

Commit message:

Docs: Update LSM/apparmor.rst
After the deprecation of CONFIG_DEFAULT_SECURITY, it is no longer used
to enable and configure AppArmor. Since kernel 5.0,
`CONFIG_SECURITY_APPARMOR_BOOTPARAM_VALUE` is not used either.
Instead, the CONFIG_LSM parameter manages the order and selection of LSMs.

Signed-off-by: Siddharth Menon <simeddon@gmail.com>
Signed-off-by: John Johansen <john.johansen@canonical.com>

Documentation/admin-guide/LSM/apparmor.rst, after:

========
AppArmor
========

What is AppArmor?
=================

AppArmor is MAC style security extension for the Linux kernel.  It implements
a task centered policy, with task "profiles" being created and loaded
from user space.  Tasks on the system that do not have a profile defined for
them run in an unconfined state which is equivalent to standard Linux DAC
permissions.

How to enable/disable
=====================

set ``CONFIG_SECURITY_APPARMOR=y``

If AppArmor should be selected as the default security module then set::

   CONFIG_DEFAULT_SECURITY_APPARMOR=y

The CONFIG_LSM parameter manages the order and selection of LSMs.
Specify apparmor as the first "major" module (e.g. AppArmor, SELinux, Smack)
in the list.

Build the kernel

If AppArmor is not the default security module it can be enabled by passing
``security=apparmor`` on the kernel's command line.

If AppArmor is the default security module it can be disabled by passing
``apparmor=0, security=XXXX`` (where ``XXXX`` is valid security module), on the
kernel's command line.

For AppArmor to enforce any restrictions beyond standard Linux DAC permissions
policy must be loaded into the kernel from user space (see the Documentation
and tools links).

Documentation
=============

Documentation can be found on the wiki, linked below.

Links
=====

Mailing List - apparmor@lists.ubuntu.com

Wiki - http://wiki.apparmor.net

User space tools - https://gitlab.com/apparmor

Kernel module - git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/jj/linux-apparmor
