.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2005
.\"	Hartmut Brandt
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003
.\"	Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (FhG Fokus).
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Author: Hartmut Brandt <harti@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Begemot: libunimsg/man/libngatm.3,v 1.6 2005/06/15 11:37:07 brandt_h Exp $
.\"
.Dd May 23, 2005
.Dt LIBNGATM 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm libngatm
.Nd "ATM signalling library"
.Sh LIBRARY
Begemot ATM signalling library
.Pq libngatm, -lngatm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Begemot UNI signalling library handles message decoding and encoding as
well as the Q.2110 and Q.2120 transport protocols and adaptation layers, and
ATM-Forum UNI 4.0 compliant signalling.
Because of this complexity the description is broken down in several man pages:
.Bl -tag -width XXXX
.It Xr unimsg 3
Describes a data structure and functions for handling of variable sized
messages.
.It Xr unistruct 3
describes data structures for the decoding, encoding and printing functions
in the library.
.It Xr unifunc 3
describes the decoding, encoding and printing functions.
.\" .It Xr sscop 3
.\" describes the SSCOP transport protocol functions.
.\" .It Xr sscfu 3
.\" describes the SSCF at the UNI functions.
.\" .It Xr uni 3
.\" describes the UNI 4.0 signalling functions.
.It Xr uniaddr 3
describes address structures and handling functions.
.It Xr unisap 3
.\" describes ATM-Forum ATM-API service access point structures and
.\" handling functions.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sscop 1
.Sh STANDARDS
This implementation conforms to the applicable ITU-T
recommendations and ATM Forum standards.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Hartmut Brandt Aq harti@FreeBSD.org
