.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2005
.\"	Hartmut Brandt.
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003
.\"	Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (FhG Fokus).
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Hartmut Brandt <harti@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $Begemot: libunimsg/man/unisap.3,v 1.5 2005/06/15 11:37:11 brandt_h Exp $
.\"
.Dd June 14, 2005
.Dt UNISAP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm unimsg ,
.Nm unisve_check_addr ,
.Nm unisve_check_selector ,
.Nm unisve_check_blli_id2 ,
.Nm unisve_check_blli_id3 ,
.Nm unisve_check_bhli ,
.Nm unisve_check_sap ,
.Nm unisve_overlap_addr ,
.Nm unisve_overlap_selector ,
.Nm unisve_overlap_blli_id2 ,
.Nm unisve_overlap_blli_id3 ,
.Nm unisve_overlap_bhli ,
.Nm unisve_overlap_sap ,
.Nm unisve_is_catchall ,
.Nm unisve_match
.Nd "ATM signalling library - ATM SAP handling"
.Sh LIBRARY
Begemot ATM signalling library
.Pq libunimsg, -lunimsg
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In uni4/unisap.h
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_check_addr "const struct unisve_addr *sve"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_check_selector "const struct unisve_selector *sve"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_check_blli_id2 "const struct unisve_blli_id2 *sve"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_check_blli_id3 "const struct unisve_blli_id3 *sve"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_check_bhli "const struct unisve_bhli *sve"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_check_sap "const struct uni_sap *sve"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_overlap_addr "const struct unisve_addr *sve1" "const struct unisve_addr *sve2"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_overlap_selector "const struct unisve_selector *sve1" "const struct unisve_selector *sve2"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_overlap_blli_id2 "const struct unisve_blli_id2 *sve1" "const struct unisve_blli_id2 *sve2"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_overlap_blli_id3 "const struct unisve_blli_id3 *sve1" "const struct unisve_blli_id3 *sve2"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_overlap_bhli "const struct unisve_bhli *sve1" "const struct unisve_bhli *sve2"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_overlap_sap "const struct uni_sap *sap1" "const struct uni_sap *sap2"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_is_catchall "const struct uni_sap *sap"
.Ft int
.Fn unisve_match "const struct uni_sap *sap" \
"const struct uni_ie_called *called" "const struct uni_ie_blli *blli" \
"const struct uni_ie_bhli *bhli"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
library contains functions to handle Service Access Points (SAP) and SAP Vector
Elements (SVE) as specified in the ATM Forum ATM API Semantic Description.
SAPs are the analog of TCP and UDP ports in the ATM world.
As usually in ATM they are a couple of orders of magnitude more complex as
their Internet equivalent.
See the ATM Forum document for a description.
.Pp
A SAP is a data structure:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct uni_sap {
	struct unisve_addr	addr;
	struct unisve_selector	selector;
	struct unisve_blli_id2	blli_id2;
	struct unisve_blli_id3	blli_id3;
	struct unisve_bhli	bhli;
};
.Ed
.Pp
that consists of 5 elements matching different information elements in
the SETUP message.
Each of these elements has a tag that defines how the SVE is to be matched
with the information element.
The tag is one of
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv UNISVE_PRESENT"
.It Dv UNISVE_ABSENT
The information element has to absent from the SETUP message.
.It Dv UNISVE_PRESENT
The information element has to be present in the SETUP message and must
match the SVE.
.It Dv UNISVE_ANY
The information element may be absent from the SETUP message or may
have any value.
.El
.Pp
The called address is matched by a
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct unisve_addr {
	enum unisve_tag	tag;
	enum uni_addr_type type;/* type of address */
	enum uni_addr_plan plan;/* addressing plan */
	uint32_t	len;	/* length of address */
	u_char		addr[UNI_ADDR_MAXLEN];
};
.Ed
.Pp
Here
.Fa type
is the type of address and
.Fa plan
is the address plan.
.Fa len
is the length of the address (for ATME addresses not counting the selector byte)
and
.Fa addr is the address itself.
.Pp
In case of ATME addresses the selector byte is matched by a
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct unisve_selector {
	enum unisve_tag	tag;
	uint8_t		selector;
};
.Ed
.Pp
Here
.Fa selector
is the selector byte that must match the 20th byte of the ATME calling address
from the SETUP message.
.Pp
The BLLI information element is matched by two SVEs: one for layer 2 options
and one for layer 3 options.
The layer 2 SVE is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct unisve_blli_id2 {
	enum unisve_tag	tag;
	uint8_t		proto:5;/* the protocol */
	uint8_t		user:7;	/* user specific protocol */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Where the
.Fa user
fields is matched only if the
.Fa proto
field specifies
.Dv UNI_BLLI_L2_USER .
The layer 3 SVE is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct unisve_blli_id3 {
	enum unisve_tag	tag;
	uint8_t		proto:5;/* L3 protocol */
	uint8_t		user:7;	/* user specific protocol */
	uint8_t		ipi:8;	/* ISO/IEC TR 9557 IPI */
	uint32_t	oui:24;	/* IEEE 802.1 OUI */
	uint32_t	pid:16;	/* IEEE 802.1 PID */
	uint32_t	noipi;	/* ISO/IEC TR 9557 per frame */
};
.Ed
For the exact rules how matching occures refer to the source code or the
ATM Forum document.
.Pp
Finally the BHLI information element is matched with a
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct unisve_bhli {
	enum unisve_tag	tag;
	enum uni_bhli	type;	/* type of info */
	uint32_t	len;	/* length of info */
	uint8_t		info[8];/* info itself */
};
.Ed
.Pp
For each SVE type there is a function that checks whether the SVE is correct
specified.
The functions
.Fn unisve_check_addr ,
.Fn unisve_check_selector ,
.Fn unisve_check_blli_id2 ,
.Fn unisve_check_blli_id3 ,
and
.Fn unisve_check_bhli
return one of the following error codes:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
enum {
	UNISVE_OK = 0,
	UNISVE_ERROR_BAD_TAG,
	UNISVE_ERROR_TYPE_PLAN_CONFLICT,
	UNISVE_ERROR_ADDR_SEL_CONFLICT,
	UNISVE_ERROR_ADDR_LEN,
	UNISVE_ERROR_BAD_ADDR_TYPE,
	UNISVE_ERROR_BAD_BHLI_TYPE,
	UNISVE_ERROR_BAD_BHLI_LEN,
};
.Ed
.Pp
A code of
.Li UNISVE_OK
means that the SVE has no error.
The function
.Fn unisve_check_sap
checks a complete SAP and returns one of the above codes.
.Pp
There is a definition
.Dv UNISVE_ERRSTR
that evaluates to a comma separated list of strings that can be used
to initializes an array of char pointers to map the error codes into
human readable strings.
.Pp
The ATM Forum document defines the concept of overlaping SAPs.
This basically means, that an incoming SETUP could match more than one SAP
(and more than one application) to receive the SETUP.
For each SVE type there is a function that checks whether two SVEs overlap
and there is a function that checks whether two SAPs overlap.
The functions
.Fn unisve_overlap_addr ,
.Fn unisve_overlap_selector ,
.Fn unisve_overlap_blli_id2 ,
.Fn unisve_overlap_blli_id3 ,
.Fn unisve_overlap_bhli , and
.Fn unisve_overlap_sap
return 1 if the SVEs or SAPs overlap and 0 if they do not.
They assume, that the SAPs are correct.
.Pp
The ATM Forum document specifies a catch-all SAP.
The function
.Fn unisve_is_catchall
returns 1 if the SAP is the catch-all SAP and 0 otherwise.
.Pp
Finally the function
.Fn unisve_match
is used to match a SAP against the information elements from a SETUP message.
It returns 1 if they match and 0 otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr libunimsg 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Hartmut Brandt Aq harti@FreeBSD.org
