==============================
LLVM Language Reference Manual
==============================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 3

Abstract
========

This document is a reference manual for the LLVM assembly language. LLVM
is a Static Single Assignment (SSA) based representation that provides
type safety, low-level operations, flexibility, and the capability of
representing 'all' high-level languages cleanly. It is the common code
representation used throughout all phases of the LLVM compilation
strategy.

Introduction
============

The LLVM code representation is designed to be used in three different
forms: as an in-memory compiler IR, as an on-disk bitcode representation
(suitable for fast loading by a Just-In-Time compiler), and as a human
readable assembly language representation. This allows LLVM to provide a
powerful intermediate representation for efficient compiler
transformations and analysis, while providing a natural means to debug
and visualize the transformations. The three different forms of LLVM are
all equivalent. This document describes the human readable
representation and notation.

The LLVM representation aims to be light-weight and low-level while
being expressive, typed, and extensible at the same time. It aims to be
a "universal IR" of sorts, by being at a low enough level that
high-level ideas may be cleanly mapped to it (similar to how
microprocessors are "universal IR's", allowing many source languages to
be mapped to them). By providing type information, LLVM can be used as
the target of optimizations: for example, through pointer analysis, it
can be proven that a C automatic variable is never accessed outside of
the current function, allowing it to be promoted to a simple SSA value
instead of a memory location.

.. _wellformed:

Well-Formedness
---------------

It is important to note that this document describes 'well formed' LLVM
assembly language. There is a difference between what the parser accepts
and what is considered 'well formed'. For example, the following
instruction is syntactically okay, but not well formed:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %x = add i32 1, %x

because the definition of ``%x`` does not dominate all of its uses. The
LLVM infrastructure provides a verification pass that may be used to
verify that an LLVM module is well formed. This pass is automatically
run by the parser after parsing input assembly and by the optimizer
before it outputs bitcode. The violations pointed out by the verifier
pass indicate bugs in transformation passes or input to the parser.

Syntax
======

.. _identifiers:

Identifiers
-----------

LLVM identifiers come in two basic types: global and local. Global
identifiers (functions, global variables) begin with the ``'@'``
character. Local identifiers (register names, types) begin with the
``'%'`` character. Additionally, there are three different formats for
identifiers, for different purposes:

#. Named values are represented as a string of characters with their
   prefix. For example, ``%foo``, ``@DivisionByZero``,
   ``%a.really.long.identifier``. The actual regular expression used is
   '``[%@][-a-zA-Z$._][-a-zA-Z$._0-9]*``'. Identifiers that require other
   characters in their names can be surrounded with quotes. Special
   characters may be escaped using ``"\xx"`` where ``xx`` is the ASCII
   code for the character in hexadecimal. In this way, any character can
   be used in a name value, even quotes themselves. The ``"\01"`` prefix
   can be used on global values to suppress mangling.
#. Unnamed values are represented as an unsigned numeric value with
   their prefix. For example, ``%12``, ``@2``, ``%44``.
#. Constants, which are described in the section Constants_ below.

LLVM requires that values start with a prefix for two reasons: Compilers
don't need to worry about name clashes with reserved words, and the set
of reserved words may be expanded in the future without penalty.
Additionally, unnamed identifiers allow a compiler to quickly come up
with a temporary variable without having to avoid symbol table
conflicts.

Reserved words in LLVM are very similar to reserved words in other
languages. There are keywords for different opcodes ('``add``',
'``bitcast``', '``ret``', etc...), for primitive type names ('``void``',
'``i32``', etc...), and others. These reserved words cannot conflict
with variable names, because none of them start with a prefix character
(``'%'`` or ``'@'``).

Here is an example of LLVM code to multiply the integer variable
'``%X``' by 8:

The easy way:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %result = mul i32 %X, 8

After strength reduction:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %result = shl i32 %X, 3

And the hard way:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %0 = add i32 %X, %X           ; yields i32:%0
    %1 = add i32 %0, %0           ; yields i32:%1
    %result = add i32 %1, %1

This last way of multiplying ``%X`` by 8 illustrates several important
lexical features of LLVM:

#. Comments are delimited with a '``;``' and go until the end of line.
#. Unnamed temporaries are created when the result of a computation is
   not assigned to a named value.
#. By default, unnamed temporaries are numbered sequentially (using a
   per-function incrementing counter, starting with 0). However, when explicitly
   specifying temporary numbers, it is allowed to skip over numbers.

   Note that basic blocks and unnamed function parameters are included in this
   numbering. For example, if the entry basic block is not given a label name
   and all function parameters are named, then it will get number 0.

It also shows a convention that we follow in this document. When
demonstrating instructions, we will follow an instruction with a comment
that defines the type and name of value produced.

.. _string_constants:

String constants
----------------

Strings in LLVM programs are delimited by ``"`` characters. Within a
string, all bytes are treated literally with the exception of ``\``
characters, which start escapes, and the first ``"`` character, which
ends the string.

There are two kinds of escapes.

* ``\\`` represents a single ``\`` character.

* ``\`` followed by two hexadecimal characters (0-9, a-f, or A-F)
  represents the byte with the given value (e.g. \x00 represents a
  null byte).

To represent a ``"`` character, use ``\22``. (``\"`` will end the string
with a trailing ``\``.)

Newlines do not terminate string constants; strings can span multiple
lines.

The interpretation of string constants (e.g. their character encoding)
depends on context.


High Level Structure
====================

Module Structure
----------------

LLVM programs are composed of ``Module``'s, each of which is a
translation unit of the input programs. Each module consists of
functions, global variables, and symbol table entries. Modules may be
combined together with the LLVM linker, which merges function (and
global variable) definitions, resolves forward declarations, and merges
symbol table entries. Here is an example of the "hello world" module:

.. code-block:: llvm

    ; Declare the string constant as a global constant.
    @.str = private unnamed_addr constant [13 x i8] c"hello world\0A\00"

    ; External declaration of the puts function
    declare i32 @puts(ptr nocapture) nounwind

    ; Definition of main function
    define i32 @main() {
      ; Call puts function to write out the string to stdout.
      call i32 @puts(ptr @.str)
      ret i32 0
    }

    ; Named metadata
    !0 = !{i32 42, null, !"string"}
    !foo = !{!0}

This example is made up of a :ref:`global variable <globalvars>` named
"``.str``", an external declaration of the "``puts``" function, a
:ref:`function definition <functionstructure>` for "``main``" and
:ref:`named metadata <namedmetadatastructure>` "``foo``".

In general, a module is made up of a list of global values (where both
functions and global variables are global values). Global values are
represented by a pointer to a memory location (in this case, a pointer
to an array of char, and a pointer to a function), and have one of the
following :ref:`linkage types <linkage>`.

.. _linkage:

Linkage Types
-------------

All Global Variables and Functions have one of the following types of
linkage:

``private``
    Global values with "``private``" linkage are only directly
    accessible by objects in the current module. In particular, linking
    code into a module with a private global value may cause the
    private to be renamed as necessary to avoid collisions. Because the
    symbol is private to the module, all references can be updated. This
    doesn't show up in any symbol table in the object file.
``internal``
    Similar to private, but the value shows as a local symbol
    (``STB_LOCAL`` in the case of ELF) in the object file. This
    corresponds to the notion of the '``static``' keyword in C.
``available_externally``
    Globals with "``available_externally``" linkage are never emitted into
    the object file corresponding to the LLVM module. From the linker's
    perspective, an ``available_externally`` global is equivalent to
    an external declaration. They exist to allow inlining and other
    optimizations to take place given knowledge of the definition of the
    global, which is known to be somewhere outside the module. Globals
    with ``available_externally`` linkage are allowed to be discarded at
    will, and allow inlining and other optimizations. This linkage type is
    only allowed on definitions, not declarations.
``linkonce``
    Globals with "``linkonce``" linkage are merged with other globals of
    the same name when linkage occurs. This can be used to implement
    some forms of inline functions, templates, or other code which must
    be generated in each translation unit that uses it, but where the
    body may be overridden with a more definitive definition later.
    Unreferenced ``linkonce`` globals are allowed to be discarded. Note
    that ``linkonce`` linkage does not actually allow the optimizer to
    inline the body of this function into callers because it doesn't
    know if this definition of the function is the definitive definition
    within the program or whether it will be overridden by a stronger
    definition. To enable inlining and other optimizations, use
    "``linkonce_odr``" linkage.
``weak``
    "``weak``" linkage has the same merging semantics as ``linkonce``
    linkage, except that unreferenced globals with ``weak`` linkage may
    not be discarded. This is used for globals that are declared "weak"
    in C source code.
``common``
    "``common``" linkage is most similar to "``weak``" linkage, but they
    are used for tentative definitions in C, such as "``int X;``" at
    global scope. Symbols with "``common``" linkage are merged in the
    same way as ``weak symbols``, and they may not be deleted if
    unreferenced. ``common`` symbols may not have an explicit section,
    must have a zero initializer, and may not be marked
    ':ref:`constant <globalvars>`'. Functions and aliases may not have
    common linkage.

.. _linkage_appending:

``appending``
    "``appending``" linkage may only be applied to global variables of
    pointer to array type. When two global variables with appending
    linkage are linked together, the two global arrays are appended
    together. This is the LLVM, typesafe, equivalent of having the
    system linker append together "sections" with identical names when
    .o files are linked.

    Unfortunately this doesn't correspond to any feature in .o files, so it
    can only be used for variables like ``llvm.global_ctors`` which llvm
    interprets specially.

``extern_weak``
    The semantics of this linkage follow the ELF object file model: the
    symbol is weak until linked, if not linked, the symbol becomes null
    instead of being an undefined reference.
``linkonce_odr``, ``weak_odr``
    The ``odr`` suffix indicates that all globals defined with the given name
    are equivalent, along the lines of the C++ "one definition rule" ("ODR").
    Informally, this means we can inline functions and fold loads of constants.

    Formally, use the following definition: when an ``odr`` function is
    called, one of the definitions is non-deterministically chosen to run. For
    ``odr`` variables, if any byte in the value is not equal in all
    initializers, that byte is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. For
    aliases and ifuncs, apply the rule for the underlying function or variable.

    These linkage types are otherwise the same as their non-``odr`` versions.
``external``
    If none of the above identifiers are used, the global is externally
    visible, meaning that it participates in linkage and can be used to
    resolve external symbol references.

It is illegal for a global variable or function *declaration* to have any
linkage type other than ``external`` or ``extern_weak``.

.. _callingconv:

Calling Conventions
-------------------

LLVM :ref:`functions <functionstructure>`, :ref:`calls <i_call>` and
:ref:`invokes <i_invoke>` can all have an optional calling convention
specified for the call. The calling convention of any pair of dynamic
caller/callee must match, or the behavior of the program is undefined.
The following calling conventions are supported by LLVM, and more may be
added in the future:

"``ccc``" - The C calling convention
    This calling convention (the default if no other calling convention
    is specified) matches the target C calling conventions. This calling
    convention supports varargs function calls and tolerates some
    mismatch in the declared prototype and implemented declaration of
    the function (as does normal C).
"``fastcc``" - The fast calling convention
    This calling convention attempts to make calls as fast as possible
    (e.g. by passing things in registers). This calling convention
    allows the target to use whatever tricks it wants to produce fast
    code for the target, without having to conform to an externally
    specified ABI (Application Binary Interface). `Tail calls can only
    be optimized when this, the tailcc, the GHC or the HiPE convention is
    used. <CodeGenerator.html#tail-call-optimization>`_ This calling
    convention does not support varargs and requires the prototype of all
    callees to exactly match the prototype of the function definition.
"``coldcc``" - The cold calling convention
    This calling convention attempts to make code in the caller as
    efficient as possible under the assumption that the call is not
    commonly executed. As such, these calls often preserve all registers
    so that the call does not break any live ranges in the caller side.
    This calling convention does not support varargs and requires the
    prototype of all callees to exactly match the prototype of the
    function definition. Furthermore the inliner doesn't consider such function
    calls for inlining.
"``ghccc``" - GHC convention
    This calling convention has been implemented specifically for use by
    the `Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC) <http://www.haskell.org/ghc>`_.
    It passes everything in registers, going to extremes to achieve this
    by disabling callee save registers. This calling convention should
    not be used lightly but only for specific situations such as an
    alternative to the *register pinning* performance technique often
    used when implementing functional programming languages. At the
    moment only X86, AArch64, and RISCV support this convention. The 
    following limitations exist:

    -  On *X86-32* only up to 4 bit type parameters are supported. No
       floating-point types are supported.
    -  On *X86-64* only up to 10 bit type parameters and 6
       floating-point parameters are supported.
    -  On *AArch64* only up to 4 32-bit floating-point parameters,
       4 64-bit floating-point parameters, and 10 bit type parameters
       are supported.
    -  *RISCV64* only supports up to 11 bit type parameters, 4
       32-bit floating-point parameters, and 4 64-bit floating-point
       parameters.

    This calling convention supports `tail call
    optimization <CodeGenerator.html#tail-call-optimization>`_ but requires
    both the caller and callee are using it.
"``cc 11``" - The HiPE calling convention
    This calling convention has been implemented specifically for use by
    the `High-Performance Erlang
    (HiPE) <http://www.it.uu.se/research/group/hipe/>`_ compiler, *the*
    native code compiler of the `Ericsson's Open Source Erlang/OTP
    system <http://www.erlang.org/download.shtml>`_. It uses more
    registers for argument passing than the ordinary C calling
    convention and defines no callee-saved registers. The calling
    convention properly supports `tail call
    optimization <CodeGenerator.html#tail-call-optimization>`_ but requires
    that both the caller and the callee use it. It uses a *register pinning*
    mechanism, similar to GHC's convention, for keeping frequently
    accessed runtime components pinned to specific hardware registers.
    At the moment only X86 supports this convention (both 32 and 64
    bit).
"``anyregcc``" - Dynamic calling convention for code patching
    This is a special convention that supports patching an arbitrary code
    sequence in place of a call site. This convention forces the call
    arguments into registers but allows them to be dynamically
    allocated. This can currently only be used with calls to
    llvm.experimental.patchpoint because only this intrinsic records
    the location of its arguments in a side table. See :doc:`StackMaps`.
"``preserve_mostcc``" - The `PreserveMost` calling convention
    This calling convention attempts to make the code in the caller as
    unintrusive as possible. This convention behaves identically to the `C`
    calling convention on how arguments and return values are passed, but it
    uses a different set of caller/callee-saved registers. This alleviates the
    burden of saving and recovering a large register set before and after the
    call in the caller. If the arguments are passed in callee-saved registers,
    then they will be preserved by the callee across the call. This doesn't
    apply for values returned in callee-saved registers.

    - On X86-64 the callee preserves all general purpose registers, except for
      R11 and return registers, if any. R11 can be used as a scratch register.
      The treatment of floating-point registers (XMMs/YMMs) matches the OS's C
      calling convention: on most platforms, they are not preserved and need to
      be saved by the caller, but on Windows, xmm6-xmm15 are preserved.

    - On AArch64 the callee preserve all general purpose registers, except X0-X8
      and X16-X18.

    The idea behind this convention is to support calls to runtime functions
    that have a hot path and a cold path. The hot path is usually a small piece
    of code that doesn't use many registers. The cold path might need to call out to
    another function and therefore only needs to preserve the caller-saved
    registers, which haven't already been saved by the caller. The
    `PreserveMost` calling convention is very similar to the `cold` calling
    convention in terms of caller/callee-saved registers, but they are used for
    different types of function calls. `coldcc` is for function calls that are
    rarely executed, whereas `preserve_mostcc` function calls are intended to be
    on the hot path and definitely executed a lot. Furthermore `preserve_mostcc`
    doesn't prevent the inliner from inlining the function call.

    This calling convention will be used by a future version of the ObjectiveC
    runtime and should therefore still be considered experimental at this time.
    Although this convention was created to optimize certain runtime calls to
    the ObjectiveC runtime, it is not limited to this runtime and might be used
    by other runtimes in the future too. The current implementation only
    supports X86-64, but the intention is to support more architectures in the
    future.
"``preserve_allcc``" - The `PreserveAll` calling convention
    This calling convention attempts to make the code in the caller even less
    intrusive than the `PreserveMost` calling convention. This calling
    convention also behaves identical to the `C` calling convention on how
    arguments and return values are passed, but it uses a different set of
    caller/callee-saved registers. This removes the burden of saving and
    recovering a large register set before and after the call in the caller. If
    the arguments are passed in callee-saved registers, then they will be
    preserved by the callee across the call. This doesn't apply for values
    returned in callee-saved registers.

    - On X86-64 the callee preserves all general purpose registers, except for
      R11. R11 can be used as a scratch register. Furthermore it also preserves
      all floating-point registers (XMMs/YMMs).

    - On AArch64 the callee preserve all general purpose registers, except X0-X8
      and X16-X18. Furthermore it also preserves lower 128 bits of V8-V31 SIMD -
      floating point registers.

    The idea behind this convention is to support calls to runtime functions
    that don't need to call out to any other functions.

    This calling convention, like the `PreserveMost` calling convention, will be
    used by a future version of the ObjectiveC runtime and should be considered
    experimental at this time.
"``preserve_nonecc``" - The `PreserveNone` calling convention
    This calling convention doesn't preserve any general registers. So all
    general registers are caller saved registers. It also uses all general
    registers to pass arguments. This attribute doesn't impact non-general
    purpose registers (e.g. floating point registers, on X86 XMMs/YMMs).
    Non-general purpose registers still follow the standard c calling
    convention. Currently it is for x86_64 and AArch64 only.
"``cxx_fast_tlscc``" - The `CXX_FAST_TLS` calling convention for access functions
    Clang generates an access function to access C++-style TLS. The access
    function generally has an entry block, an exit block and an initialization
    block that is run at the first time. The entry and exit blocks can access
    a few TLS IR variables, each access will be lowered to a platform-specific
    sequence.

    This calling convention aims to minimize overhead in the caller by
    preserving as many registers as possible (all the registers that are
    preserved on the fast path, composed of the entry and exit blocks).

    This calling convention behaves identical to the `C` calling convention on
    how arguments and return values are passed, but it uses a different set of
    caller/callee-saved registers.

    Given that each platform has its own lowering sequence, hence its own set
    of preserved registers, we can't use the existing `PreserveMost`.

    - On X86-64 the callee preserves all general purpose registers, except for
      RDI and RAX.
"``tailcc``" - Tail callable calling convention
    This calling convention ensures that calls in tail position will always be
    tail call optimized. This calling convention is equivalent to fastcc,
    except for an additional guarantee that tail calls will be produced
    whenever possible. `Tail calls can only be optimized when this, the fastcc,
    the GHC or the HiPE convention is used. <CodeGenerator.html#tail-call-optimization>`_
    This calling convention does not support varargs and requires the prototype of
    all callees to exactly match the prototype of the function definition.
"``swiftcc``" - This calling convention is used for Swift language.
    - On X86-64 RCX and R8 are available for additional integer returns, and
      XMM2 and XMM3 are available for additional FP/vector returns.
    - On iOS platforms, we use AAPCS-VFP calling convention.
"``swifttailcc``"
    This calling convention is like ``swiftcc`` in most respects, but also the
    callee pops the argument area of the stack so that mandatory tail calls are
    possible as in ``tailcc``.
"``cfguard_checkcc``" - Windows Control Flow Guard (Check mechanism)
    This calling convention is used for the Control Flow Guard check function,
    calls to which can be inserted before indirect calls to check that the call
    target is a valid function address. The check function has no return value,
    but it will trigger an OS-level error if the address is not a valid target.
    The set of registers preserved by the check function, and the register
    containing the target address are architecture-specific.

    - On X86 the target address is passed in ECX.
    - On ARM the target address is passed in R0.
    - On AArch64 the target address is passed in X15.
"``cc <n>``" - Numbered convention
    Any calling convention may be specified by number, allowing
    target-specific calling conventions to be used. Target specific
    calling conventions start at 64.

More calling conventions can be added/defined on an as-needed basis, to
support Pascal conventions or any other well-known target-independent
convention.

.. _visibilitystyles:

Visibility Styles
-----------------

All Global Variables and Functions have one of the following visibility
styles:

"``default``" - Default style
    On targets that use the ELF object file format, default visibility
    means that the declaration is visible to other modules and, in
    shared libraries, means that the declared entity may be overridden.
    On Darwin, default visibility means that the declaration is visible
    to other modules. On XCOFF, default visibility means no explicit
    visibility bit will be set and whether the symbol is visible
    (i.e "exported") to other modules depends primarily on export lists
    provided to the linker. Default visibility corresponds to "external
    linkage" in the language.
"``hidden``" - Hidden style
    Two declarations of an object with hidden visibility refer to the
    same object if they are in the same shared object. Usually, hidden
    visibility indicates that the symbol will not be placed into the
    dynamic symbol table, so no other module (executable or shared
    library) can reference it directly.
"``protected``" - Protected style
    On ELF, protected visibility indicates that the symbol will be
    placed in the dynamic symbol table, but that references within the
    defining module will bind to the local symbol. That is, the symbol
    cannot be overridden by another module.

A symbol with ``internal`` or ``private`` linkage must have ``default``
visibility.

.. _dllstorageclass:

DLL Storage Classes
-------------------

All Global Variables, Functions and Aliases can have one of the following
DLL storage class:

``dllimport``
    "``dllimport``" causes the compiler to reference a function or variable via
    a global pointer to a pointer that is set up by the DLL exporting the
    symbol. On Microsoft Windows targets, the pointer name is formed by
    combining ``__imp_`` and the function or variable name.
``dllexport``
    On Microsoft Windows targets, "``dllexport``" causes the compiler to provide
    a global pointer to a pointer in a DLL, so that it can be referenced with the
    ``dllimport`` attribute. the pointer name is formed by combining ``__imp_``
    and the function or variable name. On XCOFF targets, ``dllexport`` indicates
    that the symbol will be made visible to other modules using "exported"
    visibility and thus placed by the linker in the loader section symbol table.
    Since this storage class exists for defining a dll interface, the compiler,
    assembler and linker know it is externally referenced and must refrain from
    deleting the symbol.

A symbol with ``internal`` or ``private`` linkage cannot have a DLL storage
class.

.. _tls_model:

Thread Local Storage Models
---------------------------

A variable may be defined as ``thread_local``, which means that it will
not be shared by threads (each thread will have a separated copy of the
variable). Not all targets support thread-local variables. Optionally, a
TLS model may be specified:

``localdynamic``
    For variables that are only used within the current shared library.
``initialexec``
    For variables in modules that will not be loaded dynamically.
``localexec``
    For variables defined in the executable and only used within it.

If no explicit model is given, the "general dynamic" model is used.

The models correspond to the ELF TLS models; see `ELF Handling For
Thread-Local Storage <http://people.redhat.com/drepper/tls.pdf>`_ for
more information on under which circumstances the different models may
be used. The target may choose a different TLS model if the specified
model is not supported, or if a better choice of model can be made.

A model can also be specified in an alias, but then it only governs how
the alias is accessed. It will not have any effect in the aliasee.

For platforms without linker support of ELF TLS model, the -femulated-tls
flag can be used to generate GCC compatible emulated TLS code.

.. _runtime_preemption_model:

Runtime Preemption Specifiers
-----------------------------

Global variables, functions and aliases may have an optional runtime preemption
specifier. If a preemption specifier isn't given explicitly, then a
symbol is assumed to be ``dso_preemptable``.

``dso_preemptable``
    Indicates that the function or variable may be replaced by a symbol from
    outside the linkage unit at runtime.

``dso_local``
    The compiler may assume that a function or variable marked as ``dso_local``
    will resolve to a symbol within the same linkage unit. Direct access will
    be generated even if the definition is not within this compilation unit.

.. _namedtypes:

Structure Types
---------------

LLVM IR allows you to specify both "identified" and "literal" :ref:`structure
types <t_struct>`. Literal types are uniqued structurally, but identified types
are never uniqued. An :ref:`opaque structural type <t_opaque>` can also be used
to forward declare a type that is not yet available.

An example of an identified structure specification is:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %mytype = type { %mytype*, i32 }

Prior to the LLVM 3.0 release, identified types were structurally uniqued. Only
literal types are uniqued in recent versions of LLVM.

.. _nointptrtype:

Non-Integral Pointer Type
-------------------------

Note: non-integral pointer types are a work in progress, and they should be
considered experimental at this time.

LLVM IR optionally allows the frontend to denote pointers in certain address
spaces as "non-integral" via the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>`.
Non-integral pointer types represent pointers that have an *unspecified* bitwise
representation; that is, the integral representation may be target dependent or
unstable (not backed by a fixed integer).

``inttoptr`` and ``ptrtoint`` instructions have the same semantics as for
integral (i.e. normal) pointers in that they convert integers to and from
corresponding pointer types, but there are additional implications to be
aware of.  Because the bit-representation of a non-integral pointer may
not be stable, two identical casts of the same operand may or may not
return the same value.  Said differently, the conversion to or from the
non-integral type depends on environmental state in an implementation
defined manner.

If the frontend wishes to observe a *particular* value following a cast, the
generated IR must fence with the underlying environment in an implementation
defined manner. (In practice, this tends to require ``noinline`` routines for
such operations.)

From the perspective of the optimizer, ``inttoptr`` and ``ptrtoint`` for
non-integral types are analogous to ones on integral types with one
key exception: the optimizer may not, in general, insert new dynamic
occurrences of such casts.  If a new cast is inserted, the optimizer would
need to either ensure that a) all possible values are valid, or b)
appropriate fencing is inserted.  Since the appropriate fencing is
implementation defined, the optimizer can't do the latter.  The former is
challenging as many commonly expected properties, such as
``ptrtoint(v)-ptrtoint(v) == 0``, don't hold for non-integral types.
Similar restrictions apply to intrinsics that might examine the pointer bits,
such as :ref:`llvm.ptrmask<int_ptrmask>`. 

The alignment information provided by the frontend for a non-integral pointer
(typically using attributes or metadata) must be valid for every possible 
representation of the pointer.

.. _globalvars:

Global Variables
----------------

Global variables define regions of memory allocated at compilation time
instead of run-time.

Global variable definitions must be initialized.

Global variables in other translation units can also be declared, in which
case they don't have an initializer.

Global variables can optionally specify a :ref:`linkage type <linkage>`.

Either global variable definitions or declarations may have an explicit section
to be placed in and may have an optional explicit alignment specified. If there
is a mismatch between the explicit or inferred section information for the
variable declaration and its definition the resulting behavior is undefined.

A variable may be defined as a global ``constant``, which indicates that
the contents of the variable will **never** be modified (enabling better
optimization, allowing the global data to be placed in the read-only
section of an executable, etc). Note that variables that need runtime
initialization cannot be marked ``constant`` as there is a store to the
variable.

LLVM explicitly allows *declarations* of global variables to be marked
constant, even if the final definition of the global is not. This
capability can be used to enable slightly better optimization of the
program, but requires the language definition to guarantee that
optimizations based on the 'constantness' are valid for the translation
units that do not include the definition.

As SSA values, global variables define pointer values that are in scope
(i.e. they dominate) all basic blocks in the program. Global variables
always define a pointer to their "content" type because they describe a
region of memory, and all memory objects in LLVM are accessed through
pointers.

Global variables can be marked with ``unnamed_addr`` which indicates
that the address is not significant, only the content. Constants marked
like this can be merged with other constants if they have the same
initializer. Note that a constant with significant address *can* be
merged with a ``unnamed_addr`` constant, the result being a constant
whose address is significant.

If the ``local_unnamed_addr`` attribute is given, the address is known to
not be significant within the module.

A global variable may be declared to reside in a target-specific
numbered address space. For targets that support them, address spaces
may affect how optimizations are performed and/or what target
instructions are used to access the variable. The default address space
is zero. The address space qualifier must precede any other attributes.

LLVM allows an explicit section to be specified for globals. If the
target supports it, it will emit globals to the section specified.
Additionally, the global can placed in a comdat if the target has the necessary
support.

External declarations may have an explicit section specified. Section
information is retained in LLVM IR for targets that make use of this
information. Attaching section information to an external declaration is an
assertion that its definition is located in the specified section. If the
definition is located in a different section, the behavior is undefined.

LLVM allows an explicit code model to be specified for globals. If the
target supports it, it will emit globals in the code model specified,
overriding the code model used to compile the translation unit.
The allowed values are "tiny", "small", "kernel", "medium", "large".
This may be extended in the future to specify global data layout that
doesn't cleanly fit into a specific code model.

By default, global initializers are optimized by assuming that global
variables defined within the module are not modified from their
initial values before the start of the global initializer. This is
true even for variables potentially accessible from outside the
module, including those with external linkage or appearing in
``@llvm.used`` or dllexported variables. This assumption may be suppressed
by marking the variable with ``externally_initialized``.

An explicit alignment may be specified for a global, which must be a
power of 2. If not present, or if the alignment is set to zero, the
alignment of the global is set by the target to whatever it feels
convenient. If an explicit alignment is specified, the global is forced
to have exactly that alignment. Targets and optimizers are not allowed
to over-align the global if the global has an assigned section. In this
case, the extra alignment could be observable: for example, code could
assume that the globals are densely packed in their section and try to
iterate over them as an array, alignment padding would break this
iteration. For TLS variables, the module flag ``MaxTLSAlign``, if present,
limits the alignment to the given value. Optimizers are not allowed to
impose a stronger alignment on these variables. The maximum alignment
is ``1 << 32``.

For global variable declarations, as well as definitions that may be
replaced at link time (``linkonce``, ``weak``, ``extern_weak`` and ``common``
linkage types), the allocation size and alignment of the definition it resolves
to must be greater than or equal to that of the declaration or replaceable
definition, otherwise the behavior is undefined.

Globals can also have a :ref:`DLL storage class <dllstorageclass>`,
an optional :ref:`runtime preemption specifier <runtime_preemption_model>`,
an optional :ref:`global attributes <glattrs>` and
an optional list of attached :ref:`metadata <metadata>`.

Variables and aliases can have a
:ref:`Thread Local Storage Model <tls_model>`.

Globals cannot be or contain :ref:`Scalable vectors <t_vector>` because their
size is unknown at compile time. They are allowed in structs to facilitate
intrinsics returning multiple values. Generally, structs containing scalable
vectors are not considered "sized" and cannot be used in loads, stores, allocas,
or GEPs. The only exception to this rule is for structs that contain scalable
vectors of the same type (e.g. ``{<vscale x 2 x i32>, <vscale x 2 x i32>}``
contains the same type while ``{<vscale x 2 x i32>, <vscale x 2 x i64>}``
doesn't). These kinds of structs (we may call them homogeneous scalable vector
structs) are considered sized and can be used in loads, stores, allocas, but
not GEPs.

Globals with ``toc-data`` attribute set are stored in TOC of XCOFF. Their
alignments are not larger than that of a TOC entry. Optimizations should not
increase their alignments to mitigate TOC overflow.

Syntax::

      @<GlobalVarName> = [Linkage] [PreemptionSpecifier] [Visibility]
                         [DLLStorageClass] [ThreadLocal]
                         [(unnamed_addr|local_unnamed_addr)] [AddrSpace]
                         [ExternallyInitialized]
                         <global | constant> <Type> [<InitializerConstant>]
                         [, section "name"] [, partition "name"]
                         [, comdat [($name)]] [, align <Alignment>]
                         [, code_model "model"]
                         [, no_sanitize_address] [, no_sanitize_hwaddress]
                         [, sanitize_address_dyninit] [, sanitize_memtag]
                         (, !name !N)*

For example, the following defines a global in a numbered address space
with an initializer, section, and alignment:

.. code-block:: llvm

    @G = addrspace(5) constant float 1.0, section "foo", align 4

The following example just declares a global variable

.. code-block:: llvm

   @G = external global i32

The following example defines a global variable with the
``large`` code model:

.. code-block:: llvm

    @G = internal global i32 0, code_model "large"

The following example defines a thread-local global with the
``initialexec`` TLS model:

.. code-block:: llvm

    @G = thread_local(initialexec) global i32 0, align 4

.. _functionstructure:

Functions
---------

LLVM function definitions consist of the "``define``" keyword, an
optional :ref:`linkage type <linkage>`, an optional :ref:`runtime preemption
specifier <runtime_preemption_model>`,  an optional :ref:`visibility
style <visibility>`, an optional :ref:`DLL storage class <dllstorageclass>`,
an optional :ref:`calling convention <callingconv>`,
an optional ``unnamed_addr`` attribute, a return type, an optional
:ref:`parameter attribute <paramattrs>` for the return type, a function
name, a (possibly empty) argument list (each with optional :ref:`parameter
attributes <paramattrs>`), optional :ref:`function attributes <fnattrs>`,
an optional address space, an optional section, an optional partition,
an optional alignment, an optional :ref:`comdat <langref_comdats>`,
an optional :ref:`garbage collector name <gc>`, an optional :ref:`prefix <prefixdata>`,
an optional :ref:`prologue <prologuedata>`,
an optional :ref:`personality <personalityfn>`,
an optional list of attached :ref:`metadata <metadata>`,
an opening curly brace, a list of basic blocks, and a closing curly brace.

Syntax::

    define [linkage] [PreemptionSpecifier] [visibility] [DLLStorageClass]
           [cconv] [ret attrs]
           <ResultType> @<FunctionName> ([argument list])
           [(unnamed_addr|local_unnamed_addr)] [AddrSpace] [fn Attrs]
           [section "name"] [partition "name"] [comdat [($name)]] [align N]
           [gc] [prefix Constant] [prologue Constant] [personality Constant]
           (!name !N)* { ... }

The argument list is a comma separated sequence of arguments where each
argument is of the following form:

Syntax::

   <type> [parameter Attrs] [name]

LLVM function declarations consist of the "``declare``" keyword, an
optional :ref:`linkage type <linkage>`, an optional :ref:`visibility style
<visibility>`, an optional :ref:`DLL storage class <dllstorageclass>`, an
optional :ref:`calling convention <callingconv>`, an optional ``unnamed_addr``
or ``local_unnamed_addr`` attribute, an optional address space, a return type,
an optional :ref:`parameter attribute <paramattrs>` for the return type, a function name, a possibly
empty list of arguments, an optional alignment, an optional :ref:`garbage
collector name <gc>`, an optional :ref:`prefix <prefixdata>`, and an optional
:ref:`prologue <prologuedata>`.

Syntax::

    declare [linkage] [visibility] [DLLStorageClass]
            [cconv] [ret attrs]
            <ResultType> @<FunctionName> ([argument list])
            [(unnamed_addr|local_unnamed_addr)] [align N] [gc]
            [prefix Constant] [prologue Constant]

A function definition contains a list of basic blocks, forming the CFG (Control
Flow Graph) for the function. Each basic block may optionally start with a label
(giving the basic block a symbol table entry), contains a list of instructions
and :ref:`debug records <debugrecords>`,
and ends with a :ref:`terminator <terminators>` instruction (such as a branch or
function return). If an explicit label name is not provided, a block is assigned
an implicit numbered label, using the next value from the same counter as used
for unnamed temporaries (:ref:`see above<identifiers>`). For example, if a
function entry block does not have an explicit label, it will be assigned label
"%0", then the first unnamed temporary in that block will be "%1", etc. If a
numeric label is explicitly specified, it must match the numeric label that
would be used implicitly.

The first basic block in a function is special in two ways: it is
immediately executed on entrance to the function, and it is not allowed
to have predecessor basic blocks (i.e. there can not be any branches to
the entry block of a function). Because the block can have no
predecessors, it also cannot have any :ref:`PHI nodes <i_phi>`.

LLVM allows an explicit section to be specified for functions. If the
target supports it, it will emit functions to the section specified.
Additionally, the function can be placed in a COMDAT.

An explicit alignment may be specified for a function. If not present,
or if the alignment is set to zero, the alignment of the function is set
by the target to whatever it feels convenient. If an explicit alignment
is specified, the function is forced to have at least that much
alignment. All alignments must be a power of 2.

If the ``unnamed_addr`` attribute is given, the address is known to not
be significant and two identical functions can be merged.

If the ``local_unnamed_addr`` attribute is given, the address is known to
not be significant within the module.

If an explicit address space is not given, it will default to the program
address space from the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>`.

.. _langref_aliases:

Aliases
-------

Aliases, unlike function or variables, don't create any new data. They
are just a new symbol and metadata for an existing position.

Aliases have a name and an aliasee that is either a global value or a
constant expression.

Aliases may have an optional :ref:`linkage type <linkage>`, an optional
:ref:`runtime preemption specifier <runtime_preemption_model>`, an optional
:ref:`visibility style <visibility>`, an optional :ref:`DLL storage class
<dllstorageclass>` and an optional :ref:`tls model <tls_model>`.

Syntax::

    @<Name> = [Linkage] [PreemptionSpecifier] [Visibility] [DLLStorageClass] [ThreadLocal] [(unnamed_addr|local_unnamed_addr)] alias <AliaseeTy>, <AliaseeTy>* @<Aliasee>
              [, partition "name"]

The linkage must be one of ``private``, ``internal``, ``linkonce``, ``weak``,
``linkonce_odr``, ``weak_odr``, ``external``, ``available_externally``. Note
that some system linkers might not correctly handle dropping a weak symbol that
is aliased.

Aliases that are not ``unnamed_addr`` are guaranteed to have the same address as
the aliasee expression. ``unnamed_addr`` ones are only guaranteed to point
to the same content.

If the ``local_unnamed_addr`` attribute is given, the address is known to
not be significant within the module.

Since aliases are only a second name, some restrictions apply, of which
some can only be checked when producing an object file:

* The expression defining the aliasee must be computable at assembly
  time. Since it is just a name, no relocations can be used.

* No alias in the expression can be weak as the possibility of the
  intermediate alias being overridden cannot be represented in an
  object file.

* If the alias has the ``available_externally`` linkage, the aliasee must be an
  ``available_externally`` global value; otherwise the aliasee can be an
  expression but no global value in the expression can be a declaration, since
  that would require a relocation, which is not possible.

* If either the alias or the aliasee may be replaced by a symbol outside the
  module at link time or runtime, any optimization cannot replace the alias with
  the aliasee, since the behavior may be different. The alias may be used as a
  name guaranteed to point to the content in the current module.

.. _langref_ifunc:

IFuncs
-------

IFuncs, like as aliases, don't create any new data or func. They are just a new
symbol that is resolved at runtime by calling a resolver function.

On ELF platforms, IFuncs are resolved by the dynamic linker at load time. On
Mach-O platforms, they are lowered in terms of ``.symbol_resolver`` functions,
which lazily resolve the callee the first time they are called.

IFunc may have an optional :ref:`linkage type <linkage>` and an optional
:ref:`visibility style <visibility>`.

Syntax::

    @<Name> = [Linkage] [PreemptionSpecifier] [Visibility] ifunc <IFuncTy>, <ResolverTy>* @<Resolver>
              [, partition "name"]


.. _langref_comdats:

Comdats
-------

Comdat IR provides access to object file COMDAT/section group functionality
which represents interrelated sections.

Comdats have a name which represents the COMDAT key and a selection kind to
provide input on how the linker deduplicates comdats with the same key in two
different object files. A comdat must be included or omitted as a unit.
Discarding the whole comdat is allowed but discarding a subset is not.

A global object may be a member of at most one comdat. Aliases are placed in the
same COMDAT that their aliasee computes to, if any.

Syntax::

    $<Name> = comdat SelectionKind

For selection kinds other than ``nodeduplicate``, only one of the duplicate
comdats may be retained by the linker and the members of the remaining comdats
must be discarded. The following selection kinds are supported:

``any``
    The linker may choose any COMDAT key, the choice is arbitrary.
``exactmatch``
    The linker may choose any COMDAT key but the sections must contain the
    same data.
``largest``
    The linker will choose the section containing the largest COMDAT key.
``nodeduplicate``
    No deduplication is performed.
``samesize``
    The linker may choose any COMDAT key but the sections must contain the
    same amount of data.

- XCOFF and Mach-O don't support COMDATs.
- COFF supports all selection kinds. Non-``nodeduplicate`` selection kinds need
  a non-local linkage COMDAT symbol.
- ELF supports ``any`` and ``nodeduplicate``.
- WebAssembly only supports ``any``.

Here is an example of a COFF COMDAT where a function will only be selected if
the COMDAT key's section is the largest:

.. code-block:: text

   $foo = comdat largest
   @foo = global i32 2, comdat($foo)

   define void @bar() comdat($foo) {
     ret void
   }

In a COFF object file, this will create a COMDAT section with selection kind
``IMAGE_COMDAT_SELECT_LARGEST`` containing the contents of the ``@foo`` symbol
and another COMDAT section with selection kind
``IMAGE_COMDAT_SELECT_ASSOCIATIVE`` which is associated with the first COMDAT
section and contains the contents of the ``@bar`` symbol.

As a syntactic sugar the ``$name`` can be omitted if the name is the same as
the global name:

.. code-block:: llvm

  $foo = comdat any
  @foo = global i32 2, comdat
  @bar = global i32 3, comdat($foo)

There are some restrictions on the properties of the global object.
It, or an alias to it, must have the same name as the COMDAT group when
targeting COFF.
The contents and size of this object may be used during link-time to determine
which COMDAT groups get selected depending on the selection kind.
Because the name of the object must match the name of the COMDAT group, the
linkage of the global object must not be local; local symbols can get renamed
if a collision occurs in the symbol table.

The combined use of COMDATS and section attributes may yield surprising results.
For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   $foo = comdat any
   $bar = comdat any
   @g1 = global i32 42, section "sec", comdat($foo)
   @g2 = global i32 42, section "sec", comdat($bar)

From the object file perspective, this requires the creation of two sections
with the same name. This is necessary because both globals belong to different
COMDAT groups and COMDATs, at the object file level, are represented by
sections.

Note that certain IR constructs like global variables and functions may
create COMDATs in the object file in addition to any which are specified using
COMDAT IR. This arises when the code generator is configured to emit globals
in individual sections (e.g. when `-data-sections` or `-function-sections`
is supplied to `llc`).

.. _namedmetadatastructure:

Named Metadata
--------------

Named metadata is a collection of metadata. :ref:`Metadata
nodes <metadata>` (but not metadata strings) are the only valid
operands for a named metadata.

#. Named metadata are represented as a string of characters with the
   metadata prefix. The rules for metadata names are the same as for
   identifiers, but quoted names are not allowed. ``"\xx"`` type escapes
   are still valid, which allows any character to be part of a name.

Syntax::

    ; Some unnamed metadata nodes, which are referenced by the named metadata.
    !0 = !{!"zero"}
    !1 = !{!"one"}
    !2 = !{!"two"}
    ; A named metadata.
    !name = !{!0, !1, !2}

.. _paramattrs:

Parameter Attributes
--------------------

The return type and each parameter of a function type may have a set of
*parameter attributes* associated with them. Parameter attributes are
used to communicate additional information about the result or
parameters of a function. Parameter attributes are considered to be part
of the function, not of the function type, so functions with different
parameter attributes can have the same function type.

Parameter attributes are simple keywords that follow the type specified.
If multiple parameter attributes are needed, they are space separated.
For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

    declare i32 @printf(ptr noalias nocapture, ...)
    declare i32 @atoi(i8 zeroext)
    declare signext i8 @returns_signed_char()

Note that any attributes for the function result (``nonnull``,
``signext``) come before the result type.

Currently, only the following parameter attributes are defined:

``zeroext``
    This indicates to the code generator that the parameter or return
    value should be zero-extended to the extent required by the target's
    ABI by the caller (for a parameter) or the callee (for a return value).
``signext``
    This indicates to the code generator that the parameter or return
    value should be sign-extended to the extent required by the target's
    ABI (which is usually 32-bits) by the caller (for a parameter) or
    the callee (for a return value).
``inreg``
    This indicates that this parameter or return value should be treated
    in a special target-dependent fashion while emitting code for
    a function call or return (usually, by putting it in a register as
    opposed to memory, though some targets use it to distinguish between
    two different kinds of registers). Use of this attribute is
    target-specific.
``byval(<ty>)``
    This indicates that the pointer parameter should really be passed by
    value to the function. The attribute implies that a hidden copy of
    the pointee is made between the caller and the callee, so the callee
    is unable to modify the value in the caller. This attribute is only
    valid on LLVM pointer arguments. It is generally used to pass
    structs and arrays by value, but is also valid on pointers to
    scalars. The copy is considered to belong to the caller not the
    callee (for example, ``readonly`` functions should not write to
    ``byval`` parameters). This is not a valid attribute for return
    values.

    The byval type argument indicates the in-memory value type, and
    must be the same as the pointee type of the argument.

    The byval attribute also supports specifying an alignment with the
    align attribute. It indicates the alignment of the stack slot to
    form and the known alignment of the pointer specified to the call
    site. If the alignment is not specified, then the code generator
    makes a target-specific assumption.

.. _attr_byref:

``byref(<ty>)``

    The ``byref`` argument attribute allows specifying the pointee
    memory type of an argument. This is similar to ``byval``, but does
    not imply a copy is made anywhere, or that the argument is passed
    on the stack. This implies the pointer is dereferenceable up to
    the storage size of the type.

    It is not generally permissible to introduce a write to an
    ``byref`` pointer. The pointer may have any address space and may
    be read only.

    This is not a valid attribute for return values.

    The alignment for an ``byref`` parameter can be explicitly
    specified by combining it with the ``align`` attribute, similar to
    ``byval``. If the alignment is not specified, then the code generator
    makes a target-specific assumption.

    This is intended for representing ABI constraints, and is not
    intended to be inferred for optimization use.

.. _attr_preallocated:

``preallocated(<ty>)``
    This indicates that the pointer parameter should really be passed by
    value to the function, and that the pointer parameter's pointee has
    already been initialized before the call instruction. This attribute
    is only valid on LLVM pointer arguments. The argument must be the value
    returned by the appropriate
    :ref:`llvm.call.preallocated.arg<int_call_preallocated_arg>` on non
    ``musttail`` calls, or the corresponding caller parameter in ``musttail``
    calls, although it is ignored during codegen.

    A non ``musttail`` function call with a ``preallocated`` attribute in
    any parameter must have a ``"preallocated"`` operand bundle. A ``musttail``
    function call cannot have a ``"preallocated"`` operand bundle.

    The preallocated attribute requires a type argument, which must be
    the same as the pointee type of the argument.

    The preallocated attribute also supports specifying an alignment with the
    align attribute. It indicates the alignment of the stack slot to
    form and the known alignment of the pointer specified to the call
    site. If the alignment is not specified, then the code generator
    makes a target-specific assumption.

.. _attr_inalloca:

``inalloca(<ty>)``

    The ``inalloca`` argument attribute allows the caller to take the
    address of outgoing stack arguments. An ``inalloca`` argument must
    be a pointer to stack memory produced by an ``alloca`` instruction.
    The alloca, or argument allocation, must also be tagged with the
    inalloca keyword. Only the last argument may have the ``inalloca``
    attribute, and that argument is guaranteed to be passed in memory.

    An argument allocation may be used by a call at most once because
    the call may deallocate it. The ``inalloca`` attribute cannot be
    used in conjunction with other attributes that affect argument
    storage, like ``inreg``, ``nest``, ``sret``, or ``byval``. The
    ``inalloca`` attribute also disables LLVM's implicit lowering of
    large aggregate return values, which means that frontend authors
    must lower them with ``sret`` pointers.

    When the call site is reached, the argument allocation must have
    been the most recent stack allocation that is still live, or the
    behavior is undefined. It is possible to allocate additional stack
    space after an argument allocation and before its call site, but it
    must be cleared off with :ref:`llvm.stackrestore
    <int_stackrestore>`.

    The inalloca attribute requires a type argument, which must be the
    same as the pointee type of the argument.

    See :doc:`InAlloca` for more information on how to use this
    attribute.

``sret(<ty>)``
    This indicates that the pointer parameter specifies the address of a
    structure that is the return value of the function in the source
    program. This pointer must be guaranteed by the caller to be valid:
    loads and stores to the structure may be assumed by the callee not
    to trap and to be properly aligned. This is not a valid attribute
    for return values.

    The sret type argument specifies the in memory type, which must be
    the same as the pointee type of the argument.

.. _attr_elementtype:

``elementtype(<ty>)``

    The ``elementtype`` argument attribute can be used to specify a pointer
    element type in a way that is compatible with `opaque pointers
    <OpaquePointers.html>`__.

    The ``elementtype`` attribute by itself does not carry any specific
    semantics. However, certain intrinsics may require this attribute to be
    present and assign it particular semantics. This will be documented on
    individual intrinsics.

    The attribute may only be applied to pointer typed arguments of intrinsic
    calls. It cannot be applied to non-intrinsic calls, and cannot be applied
    to parameters on function declarations. For non-opaque pointers, the type
    passed to ``elementtype`` must match the pointer element type.

.. _attr_align:

``align <n>`` or ``align(<n>)``
    This indicates that the pointer value or vector of pointers has the
    specified alignment. If applied to a vector of pointers, *all* pointers
    (elements) have the specified alignment. If the pointer value does not have
    the specified alignment, :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` is returned or
    passed instead.  The ``align`` attribute should be combined with the
    ``noundef`` attribute to ensure a pointer is aligned, or otherwise the
    behavior is undefined. Note that ``align 1`` has no effect on non-byval,
    non-preallocated arguments.

    Note that this attribute has additional semantics when combined with the
    ``byval`` or ``preallocated`` attribute, which are documented there.

.. _noalias:

``noalias``
    This indicates that memory locations accessed via pointer values
    :ref:`based <pointeraliasing>` on the argument or return value are not also
    accessed, during the execution of the function, via pointer values not
    *based* on the argument or return value. This guarantee only holds for
    memory locations that are *modified*, by any means, during the execution of
    the function. The attribute on a return value also has additional semantics
    described below. The caller shares the responsibility with the callee for
    ensuring that these requirements are met.  For further details, please see
    the discussion of the NoAlias response in :ref:`alias analysis <Must, May,
    or No>`.

    Note that this definition of ``noalias`` is intentionally similar
    to the definition of ``restrict`` in C99 for function arguments.

    For function return values, C99's ``restrict`` is not meaningful,
    while LLVM's ``noalias`` is. Furthermore, the semantics of the ``noalias``
    attribute on return values are stronger than the semantics of the attribute
    when used on function arguments. On function return values, the ``noalias``
    attribute indicates that the function acts like a system memory allocation
    function, returning a pointer to allocated storage disjoint from the
    storage for any other object accessible to the caller.

.. _nocapture:

``nocapture``
    This indicates that the callee does not :ref:`capture <pointercapture>` the
    pointer. This is not a valid attribute for return values.
    This attribute applies only to the particular copy of the pointer passed in
    this argument. A caller could pass two copies of the same pointer with one
    being annotated nocapture and the other not, and the callee could validly
    capture through the non annotated parameter.

.. code-block:: llvm

    define void @f(ptr nocapture %a, ptr %b) {
      ; (capture %b)
    }

    call void @f(ptr @glb, ptr @glb) ; well-defined

``nofree``
    This indicates that callee does not free the pointer argument. This is not
    a valid attribute for return values.

.. _nest:

``nest``
    This indicates that the pointer parameter can be excised using the
    :ref:`trampoline intrinsics <int_trampoline>`. This is not a valid
    attribute for return values and can only be applied to one parameter.

``returned``
    This indicates that the function always returns the argument as its return
    value. This is a hint to the optimizer and code generator used when
    generating the caller, allowing value propagation, tail call optimization,
    and omission of register saves and restores in some cases; it is not
    checked or enforced when generating the callee. The parameter and the
    function return type must be valid operands for the
    :ref:`bitcast instruction <i_bitcast>`. This is not a valid attribute for
    return values and can only be applied to one parameter.

``nonnull``
    This indicates that the parameter or return pointer is not null. This
    attribute may only be applied to pointer typed parameters. This is not
    checked or enforced by LLVM; if the parameter or return pointer is null,
    :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` is returned or passed instead.
    The ``nonnull`` attribute should be combined with the ``noundef`` attribute
    to ensure a pointer is not null or otherwise the behavior is undefined.

``dereferenceable(<n>)``
    This indicates that the parameter or return pointer is dereferenceable. This
    attribute may only be applied to pointer typed parameters. A pointer that
    is dereferenceable can be loaded from speculatively without a risk of
    trapping. The number of bytes known to be dereferenceable must be provided
    in parentheses. It is legal for the number of bytes to be less than the
    size of the pointee type. The ``nonnull`` attribute does not imply
    dereferenceability (consider a pointer to one element past the end of an
    array), however ``dereferenceable(<n>)`` does imply ``nonnull`` in
    ``addrspace(0)`` (which is the default address space), except if the
    ``null_pointer_is_valid`` function attribute is present.
    ``n`` should be a positive number. The pointer should be well defined,
    otherwise it is undefined behavior. This means ``dereferenceable(<n>)``
    implies ``noundef``.

``dereferenceable_or_null(<n>)``
    This indicates that the parameter or return value isn't both
    non-null and non-dereferenceable (up to ``<n>`` bytes) at the same
    time. All non-null pointers tagged with
    ``dereferenceable_or_null(<n>)`` are ``dereferenceable(<n>)``.
    For address space 0 ``dereferenceable_or_null(<n>)`` implies that
    a pointer is exactly one of ``dereferenceable(<n>)`` or ``null``,
    and in other address spaces ``dereferenceable_or_null(<n>)``
    implies that a pointer is at least one of ``dereferenceable(<n>)``
    or ``null`` (i.e. it may be both ``null`` and
    ``dereferenceable(<n>)``). This attribute may only be applied to
    pointer typed parameters.

``swiftself``
    This indicates that the parameter is the self/context parameter. This is not
    a valid attribute for return values and can only be applied to one
    parameter.

.. _swiftasync:

``swiftasync``
    This indicates that the parameter is the asynchronous context parameter and
    triggers the creation of a target-specific extended frame record to store
    this pointer. This is not a valid attribute for return values and can only
    be applied to one parameter.

``swifterror``
    This attribute is motivated to model and optimize Swift error handling. It
    can be applied to a parameter with pointer to pointer type or a
    pointer-sized alloca. At the call site, the actual argument that corresponds
    to a ``swifterror`` parameter has to come from a ``swifterror`` alloca or
    the ``swifterror`` parameter of the caller. A ``swifterror`` value (either
    the parameter or the alloca) can only be loaded and stored from, or used as
    a ``swifterror`` argument. This is not a valid attribute for return values
    and can only be applied to one parameter.

    These constraints allow the calling convention to optimize access to
    ``swifterror`` variables by associating them with a specific register at
    call boundaries rather than placing them in memory. Since this does change
    the calling convention, a function which uses the ``swifterror`` attribute
    on a parameter is not ABI-compatible with one which does not.

    These constraints also allow LLVM to assume that a ``swifterror`` argument
    does not alias any other memory visible within a function and that a
    ``swifterror`` alloca passed as an argument does not escape.

``immarg``
    This indicates the parameter is required to be an immediate
    value. This must be a trivial immediate integer or floating-point
    constant. Undef or constant expressions are not valid. This is
    only valid on intrinsic declarations and cannot be applied to a
    call site or arbitrary function.

``noundef``
    This attribute applies to parameters and return values. If the value
    representation contains any undefined or poison bits, the behavior is
    undefined. Note that this does not refer to padding introduced by the
    type's storage representation.

.. _nofpclass:

``nofpclass(<test mask>)``
    This attribute applies to parameters and return values with
    floating-point and vector of floating-point types, as well as
    arrays of such types. The test mask has the same format as the
    second argument to the :ref:`llvm.is.fpclass <llvm.is.fpclass>`,
    and indicates which classes of floating-point values are not
    permitted for the value. For example a bitmask of 3 indicates
    the parameter may not be a NaN.

    If the value is a floating-point class indicated by the
    ``nofpclass`` test mask, a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` is
    passed or returned instead.

.. code-block:: text
  :caption: The following invariants hold

       @llvm.is.fpclass(nofpclass(test_mask) %x, test_mask) => false
       @llvm.is.fpclass(nofpclass(test_mask) %x, ~test_mask) => true
       nofpclass(all) => poison
..

   In textual IR, various string names are supported for readability
   and can be combined. For example ``nofpclass(nan pinf nzero)``
   evaluates to a mask of 547.

   This does not depend on the floating-point environment. For
   example, a function parameter marked ``nofpclass(zero)`` indicates
   no zero inputs. If this is applied to an argument in a function
   marked with :ref:`\"denormal-fp-math\" <denormal_fp_math>`
   indicating zero treatment of input denormals, it does not imply the
   value cannot be a denormal value which would compare equal to 0.

.. table:: Recognized test mask names

    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | Name  | floating-point class | Bitmask value |
    +=======+======================+===============+
    |  nan  | Any NaN              |       3       |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    |  inf  | +/- infinity         |      516      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    |  norm | +/- normal           |      264      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    |  sub  | +/- subnormal        |      144      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    |  zero | +/- 0                |       96      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    |  all  | All values           |     1023      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | snan  | Signaling NaN        |       1       |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | qnan  | Quiet NaN            |       2       |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | ninf  | Negative infinity    |       4       |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | nnorm | Negative normal      |       8       |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | nsub  | Negative subnormal   |       16      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | nzero | Negative zero        |       32      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | pzero | Positive zero        |       64      |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | psub  | Positive subnormal   |       128     |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | pnorm | Positive normal      |       256     |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+
    | pinf  | Positive infinity    |       512     |
    +-------+----------------------+---------------+


``alignstack(<n>)``
    This indicates the alignment that should be considered by the backend when
    assigning this parameter to a stack slot during calling convention
    lowering. The enforcement of the specified alignment is target-dependent,
    as target-specific calling convention rules may override this value. This
    attribute serves the purpose of carrying language specific alignment
    information that is not mapped to base types in the backend (for example,
    over-alignment specification through language attributes).

``allocalign``
    The function parameter marked with this attribute is the alignment in bytes of the
    newly allocated block returned by this function. The returned value must either have
    the specified alignment or be the null pointer. The return value MAY be more aligned
    than the requested alignment, but not less aligned.  Invalid (e.g. non-power-of-2)
    alignments are permitted for the allocalign parameter, so long as the returned pointer
    is null. This attribute may only be applied to integer parameters.

``allocptr``
    The function parameter marked with this attribute is the pointer
    that will be manipulated by the allocator. For a realloc-like
    function the pointer will be invalidated upon success (but the
    same address may be returned), for a free-like function the
    pointer will always be invalidated.

``readnone``
    This attribute indicates that the function does not dereference that
    pointer argument, even though it may read or write the memory that the
    pointer points to if accessed through other pointers.

    If a function reads from or writes to a readnone pointer argument, the
    behavior is undefined.

``readonly``
    This attribute indicates that the function does not write through this
    pointer argument, even though it may write to the memory that the pointer
    points to.

    If a function writes to a readonly pointer argument, the behavior is
    undefined.

``writeonly``
    This attribute indicates that the function may write to, but does not read
    through this pointer argument (even though it may read from the memory that
    the pointer points to).

    This attribute is understood in the same way as the ``memory(write)``
    attribute. That is, the pointer may still be read as long as the read is
    not observable outside the function. See the ``memory`` documentation for
    precise semantics.

``writable``
    This attribute is only meaningful in conjunction with ``dereferenceable(N)``
    or another attribute that implies the first ``N`` bytes of the pointer
    argument are dereferenceable.

    In that case, the attribute indicates that the first ``N`` bytes will be
    (non-atomically) loaded and stored back on entry to the function.

    This implies that it's possible to introduce spurious stores on entry to
    the function without introducing traps or data races. This does not
    necessarily hold throughout the whole function, as the pointer may escape
    to a different thread during the execution of the function. See also the
    :ref:`atomic optimization guide <Optimization outside atomic>`

    The "other attributes" that imply dereferenceability are
    ``dereferenceable_or_null`` (if the pointer is non-null) and the
    ``sret``, ``byval``, ``byref``, ``inalloca``, ``preallocated`` family of
    attributes. Note that not all of these combinations are useful, e.g.
    ``byval`` arguments are known to be writable even without this attribute.

    The ``writable`` attribute cannot be combined with ``readnone``,
    ``readonly`` or a ``memory`` attribute that does not contain
    ``argmem: write``.

``initializes((Lo1, Hi1), ...)``
    This attribute indicates that the function initializes the ranges of the
    pointer parameter's memory, ``[%p+LoN, %p+HiN)``. Initialization of memory
    means the first memory access is a non-volatile, non-atomic write. The
    write must happen before the function returns. If the function unwinds,
    the write may not happen.

    This attribute only holds for the memory accessed via this pointer
    parameter. Other arbitrary accesses to the same memory via other pointers
    are allowed.

    The ``writable`` or ``dereferenceable`` attribute do not imply the
    ``initializes`` attribute. The ``initializes`` attribute does not imply
    ``writeonly`` since ``initializes`` allows reading from the pointer
    after writing.

    This attribute is a list of constant ranges in ascending order with no
    overlapping or consecutive list elements. ``LoN/HiN`` are 64-bit integers,
    and negative values are allowed in case the argument points partway into
    an allocation. An empty list is not allowed.

``dead_on_unwind``
    At a high level, this attribute indicates that the pointer argument is dead
    if the call unwinds, in the sense that the caller will not depend on the
    contents of the memory. Stores that would only be visible on the unwind
    path can be elided.

    More precisely, the behavior is as-if any memory written through the
    pointer during the execution of the function is overwritten with a poison
    value on unwind. This includes memory written by the implicit write implied
    by the ``writable`` attribute. The caller is allowed to access the affected
    memory, but all loads that are not preceded by a store will return poison.

    This attribute cannot be applied to return values.

``range(<ty> <a>, <b>)``
    This attribute expresses the possible range of the parameter or return value.
    If the value is not in the specified range, it is converted to poison.
    The arguments passed to ``range`` have the following properties:

    -  The type must match the scalar type of the parameter or return value.
    -  The pair ``a,b`` represents the range ``[a,b)``.
    -  Both ``a`` and ``b`` are constants.
    -  The range is allowed to wrap.
    -  The range should not represent the full or empty set. That is, ``a!=b``.
    
    This attribute may only be applied to parameters or return values with integer 
    or vector of integer types.
    
    For vector-typed parameters, the range is applied element-wise.

.. _gc:

Garbage Collector Strategy Names
--------------------------------

Each function may specify a garbage collector strategy name, which is simply a
string:

.. code-block:: llvm

    define void @f() gc "name" { ... }

The supported values of *name* includes those :ref:`built in to LLVM
<builtin-gc-strategies>` and any provided by loaded plugins. Specifying a GC
strategy will cause the compiler to alter its output in order to support the
named garbage collection algorithm. Note that LLVM itself does not contain a
garbage collector, this functionality is restricted to generating machine code
which can interoperate with a collector provided externally.

.. _prefixdata:

Prefix Data
-----------

Prefix data is data associated with a function which the code
generator will emit immediately before the function's entrypoint.
The purpose of this feature is to allow frontends to associate
language-specific runtime metadata with specific functions and make it
available through the function pointer while still allowing the
function pointer to be called.

To access the data for a given function, a program may bitcast the
function pointer to a pointer to the constant's type and dereference
index -1. This implies that the IR symbol points just past the end of
the prefix data. For instance, take the example of a function annotated
with a single ``i32``,

.. code-block:: llvm

    define void @f() prefix i32 123 { ... }

The prefix data can be referenced as,

.. code-block:: llvm

    %a = getelementptr inbounds i32, ptr @f, i32 -1
    %b = load i32, ptr %a

Prefix data is laid out as if it were an initializer for a global variable
of the prefix data's type. The function will be placed such that the
beginning of the prefix data is aligned. This means that if the size
of the prefix data is not a multiple of the alignment size, the
function's entrypoint will not be aligned. If alignment of the
function's entrypoint is desired, padding must be added to the prefix
data.

A function may have prefix data but no body. This has similar semantics
to the ``available_externally`` linkage in that the data may be used by the
optimizers but will not be emitted in the object file.

.. _prologuedata:

Prologue Data
-------------

The ``prologue`` attribute allows arbitrary code (encoded as bytes) to
be inserted prior to the function body. This can be used for enabling
function hot-patching and instrumentation.

To maintain the semantics of ordinary function calls, the prologue data must
have a particular format. Specifically, it must begin with a sequence of
bytes which decode to a sequence of machine instructions, valid for the
module's target, which transfer control to the point immediately succeeding
the prologue data, without performing any other visible action. This allows
the inliner and other passes to reason about the semantics of the function
definition without needing to reason about the prologue data. Obviously this
makes the format of the prologue data highly target dependent.

A trivial example of valid prologue data for the x86 architecture is ``i8 144``,
which encodes the ``nop`` instruction:

.. code-block:: text

    define void @f() prologue i8 144 { ... }

Generally prologue data can be formed by encoding a relative branch instruction
which skips the metadata, as in this example of valid prologue data for the
x86_64 architecture, where the first two bytes encode ``jmp .+10``:

.. code-block:: text

    %0 = type <{ i8, i8, ptr }>

    define void @f() prologue %0 <{ i8 235, i8 8, ptr @md}> { ... }

A function may have prologue data but no body. This has similar semantics
to the ``available_externally`` linkage in that the data may be used by the
optimizers but will not be emitted in the object file.

.. _personalityfn:

Personality Function
--------------------

The ``personality`` attribute permits functions to specify what function
to use for exception handling.

.. _attrgrp:

Attribute Groups
----------------

Attribute groups are groups of attributes that are referenced by objects within
the IR. They are important for keeping ``.ll`` files readable, because a lot of
functions will use the same set of attributes. In the degenerative case of a
``.ll`` file that corresponds to a single ``.c`` file, the single attribute
group will capture the important command line flags used to build that file.

An attribute group is a module-level object. To use an attribute group, an
object references the attribute group's ID (e.g. ``#37``). An object may refer
to more than one attribute group. In that situation, the attributes from the
different groups are merged.

Here is an example of attribute groups for a function that should always be
inlined, has a stack alignment of 4, and which shouldn't use SSE instructions:

.. code-block:: llvm

   ; Target-independent attributes:
   attributes #0 = { alwaysinline alignstack=4 }

   ; Target-dependent attributes:
   attributes #1 = { "no-sse" }

   ; Function @f has attributes: alwaysinline, alignstack=4, and "no-sse".
   define void @f() #0 #1 { ... }

.. _fnattrs:

Function Attributes
-------------------

Function attributes are set to communicate additional information about
a function. Function attributes are considered to be part of the
function, not of the function type, so functions with different function
attributes can have the same function type.

Function attributes are simple keywords that follow the type specified.
If multiple attributes are needed, they are space separated. For
example:

.. code-block:: llvm

    define void @f() noinline { ... }
    define void @f() alwaysinline { ... }
    define void @f() alwaysinline optsize { ... }
    define void @f() optsize { ... }

``alignstack(<n>)``
    This attribute indicates that, when emitting the prologue and
    epilogue, the backend should forcibly align the stack pointer.
    Specify the desired alignment, which must be a power of two, in
    parentheses.
``"alloc-family"="FAMILY"``
    This indicates which "family" an allocator function is part of. To avoid
    collisions, the family name should match the mangled name of the primary
    allocator function, that is "malloc" for malloc/calloc/realloc/free,
    "_Znwm" for ``::operator::new`` and ``::operator::delete``, and
    "_ZnwmSt11align_val_t" for aligned ``::operator::new`` and
    ``::operator::delete``. Matching malloc/realloc/free calls within a family
    can be optimized, but mismatched ones will be left alone.
``allockind("KIND")``
    Describes the behavior of an allocation function. The KIND string contains comma
    separated entries from the following options:

    * "alloc": the function returns a new block of memory or null.
    * "realloc": the function returns a new block of memory or null. If the
      result is non-null the memory contents from the start of the block up to
      the smaller of the original allocation size and the new allocation size
      will match that of the ``allocptr`` argument and the ``allocptr``
      argument is invalidated, even if the function returns the same address.
    * "free": the function frees the block of memory specified by ``allocptr``.
      Functions marked as "free" ``allockind`` must return void.
    * "uninitialized": Any newly-allocated memory (either a new block from
      a "alloc" function or the enlarged capacity from a "realloc" function)
      will be uninitialized.
    * "zeroed": Any newly-allocated memory (either a new block from a "alloc"
      function or the enlarged capacity from a "realloc" function) will be
      zeroed.
    * "aligned": the function returns memory aligned according to the
      ``allocalign`` parameter.

    The first three options are mutually exclusive, and the remaining options
    describe more details of how the function behaves. The remaining options
    are invalid for "free"-type functions.
``allocsize(<EltSizeParam>[, <NumEltsParam>])``
    This attribute indicates that the annotated function will always return at
    least a given number of bytes (or null). Its arguments are zero-indexed
    parameter numbers; if one argument is provided, then it's assumed that at
    least ``CallSite.Args[EltSizeParam]`` bytes will be available at the
    returned pointer. If two are provided, then it's assumed that
    ``CallSite.Args[EltSizeParam] * CallSite.Args[NumEltsParam]`` bytes are
    available. The referenced parameters must be integer types. No assumptions
    are made about the contents of the returned block of memory.
``alwaysinline``
    This attribute indicates that the inliner should attempt to inline
    this function into callers whenever possible, ignoring any active
    inlining size threshold for this caller.
``builtin``
    This indicates that the callee function at a call site should be
    recognized as a built-in function, even though the function's declaration
    uses the ``nobuiltin`` attribute. This is only valid at call sites for
    direct calls to functions that are declared with the ``nobuiltin``
    attribute.
``cold``
    This attribute indicates that this function is rarely called. When
    computing edge weights, basic blocks post-dominated by a cold
    function call are also considered to be cold; and, thus, given low
    weight.

.. _attr_convergent:

``convergent``
    This attribute indicates that this function is convergent.
    When it appears on a call/invoke, the convergent attribute
    indicates that we should treat the call as though were calling a
    convergent function. This is particularly useful on indirect
    calls; without this we may treat such calls as though the target
    is non-convergent.

    See :doc:`ConvergentOperations` for further details.

    It is an error to call :ref:`llvm.experimental.convergence.entry
    <llvm.experimental.convergence.entry>` from a function that
    does not have this attribute.
``disable_sanitizer_instrumentation``
    When instrumenting code with sanitizers, it can be important to skip certain
    functions to ensure no instrumentation is applied to them.

    This attribute is not always similar to absent ``sanitize_<name>``
    attributes: depending on the specific sanitizer, code can be inserted into
    functions regardless of the ``sanitize_<name>`` attribute to prevent false
    positive reports.

    ``disable_sanitizer_instrumentation`` disables all kinds of instrumentation,
    taking precedence over the ``sanitize_<name>`` attributes and other compiler
    flags.
``"dontcall-error"``
    This attribute denotes that an error diagnostic should be emitted when a
    call of a function with this attribute is not eliminated via optimization.
    Front ends can provide optional ``srcloc`` metadata nodes on call sites of
    such callees to attach information about where in the source language such a
    call came from. A string value can be provided as a note.
``"dontcall-warn"``
    This attribute denotes that a warning diagnostic should be emitted when a
    call of a function with this attribute is not eliminated via optimization.
    Front ends can provide optional ``srcloc`` metadata nodes on call sites of
    such callees to attach information about where in the source language such a
    call came from. A string value can be provided as a note.
``fn_ret_thunk_extern``
    This attribute tells the code generator that returns from functions should
    be replaced with jumps to externally-defined architecture-specific symbols.
    For X86, this symbol's identifier is ``__x86_return_thunk``.
``"frame-pointer"``
    This attribute tells the code generator whether the function
    should keep the frame pointer. The code generator may emit the frame pointer
    even if this attribute says the frame pointer can be eliminated.
    The allowed string values are:

     * ``"none"`` (default) - the frame pointer can be eliminated, and it's
       register can be used for other purposes.
     * ``"reserved"`` - the frame pointer register must either be updated to
       point to a valid frame record for the current function, or not be
       modified.
     * ``"non-leaf"`` - the frame pointer should be kept if the function calls
       other functions.
     * ``"all"`` - the frame pointer should be kept.
``hot``
    This attribute indicates that this function is a hot spot of the program
    execution. The function will be optimized more aggressively and will be
    placed into special subsection of the text section to improving locality.

    When profile feedback is enabled, this attribute has the precedence over
    the profile information. By marking a function ``hot``, users can work
    around the cases where the training input does not have good coverage
    on all the hot functions.
``inlinehint``
    This attribute indicates that the source code contained a hint that
    inlining this function is desirable (such as the "inline" keyword in
    C/C++). It is just a hint; it imposes no requirements on the
    inliner.
``jumptable``
    This attribute indicates that the function should be added to a
    jump-instruction table at code-generation time, and that all address-taken
    references to this function should be replaced with a reference to the
    appropriate jump-instruction-table function pointer. Note that this creates
    a new pointer for the original function, which means that code that depends
    on function-pointer identity can break. So, any function annotated with
    ``jumptable`` must also be ``unnamed_addr``.
``memory(...)``
    This attribute specifies the possible memory effects of the call-site or
    function. It allows specifying the possible access kinds (``none``,
    ``read``, ``write``, or ``readwrite``) for the possible memory location
    kinds (``argmem``, ``inaccessiblemem``, as well as a default). It is best
    understood by example:

    - ``memory(none)``: Does not access any memory.
    - ``memory(read)``: May read (but not write) any memory.
    - ``memory(write)``: May write (but not read) any memory.
    - ``memory(readwrite)``: May read or write any memory.
    - ``memory(argmem: read)``: May only read argument memory.
    - ``memory(argmem: read, inaccessiblemem: write)``: May only read argument
      memory and only write inaccessible memory.
    - ``memory(read, argmem: readwrite)``: May read any memory (default mode)
      and additionally write argument memory.
    - ``memory(readwrite, argmem: none)``: May access any memory apart from
      argument memory.

    The supported access kinds are:

    - ``readwrite``: Any kind of access to the location is allowed.
    - ``read``: The location is only read. Writing to the location is immediate
      undefined behavior. This includes the case where the location is read from
      and then the same value is written back.
    - ``write``: Only writes to the location are observable outside the function
      call. However, the function may still internally read the location after
      writing it, as this is not observable. Reading the location prior to
      writing it results in a poison value.
    - ``none``: No reads or writes to the location are observed outside the
      function. It is always valid to read and write allocas, and to read global
      constants, even if ``memory(none)`` is used, as these effects are not
      externally observable.

    The supported memory location kinds are:

    - ``argmem``: This refers to accesses that are based on pointer arguments
      to the function.
    - ``inaccessiblemem``: This refers to accesses to memory which is not
      accessible by the current module (before return from the function -- an
      allocator function may return newly accessible memory while only
      accessing inaccessible memory itself). Inaccessible memory is often used
      to model control dependencies of intrinsics.
    - The default access kind (specified without a location prefix) applies to
      all locations that haven't been specified explicitly, including those that
      don't currently have a dedicated location kind (e.g. accesses to globals
      or captured pointers).

    If the ``memory`` attribute is not specified, then ``memory(readwrite)``
    is implied (all memory effects are possible).

    The memory effects of a call can be computed as
    ``CallSiteEffects & (FunctionEffects | OperandBundleEffects)``. Thus, the
    call-site annotation takes precedence over the potential effects described
    by either the function annotation or the operand bundles.
``minsize``
    This attribute suggests that optimization passes and code generator
    passes make choices that keep the code size of this function as small
    as possible and perform optimizations that may sacrifice runtime
    performance in order to minimize the size of the generated code.
    This attribute is incompatible with the ``optdebug`` and ``optnone``
    attributes.
``naked``
    This attribute disables prologue / epilogue emission for the
    function. This can have very system-specific consequences.
``"no-inline-line-tables"``
    When this attribute is set to true, the inliner discards source locations
    when inlining code and instead uses the source location of the call site.
    Breakpoints set on code that was inlined into the current function will
    not fire during the execution of the inlined call sites. If the debugger
    stops inside an inlined call site, it will appear to be stopped at the
    outermost inlined call site.
``no-jump-tables``
    When this attribute is set to true, the jump tables and lookup tables that
    can be generated from a switch case lowering are disabled.
``nobuiltin``
    This indicates that the callee function at a call site is not recognized as
    a built-in function. LLVM will retain the original call and not replace it
    with equivalent code based on the semantics of the built-in function, unless
    the call site uses the ``builtin`` attribute. This is valid at call sites
    and on function declarations and definitions.
``nocallback``
    This attribute indicates that the function is only allowed to jump back into
    caller's module by a return or an exception, and is not allowed to jump back
    by invoking a callback function, a direct, possibly transitive, external
    function call, use of ``longjmp``, or other means. It is a compiler hint that
    is used at module level to improve dataflow analysis, dropped during linking,
    and has no effect on functions defined in the current module.
``noduplicate``
    This attribute indicates that calls to the function cannot be
    duplicated. A call to a ``noduplicate`` function may be moved
    within its parent function, but may not be duplicated within
    its parent function.

    A function containing a ``noduplicate`` call may still
    be an inlining candidate, provided that the call is not
    duplicated by inlining. That implies that the function has
    internal linkage and only has one call site, so the original
    call is dead after inlining.
``nofree``
    This function attribute indicates that the function does not, directly or
    transitively, call a memory-deallocation function (``free``, for example)
    on a memory allocation which existed before the call.

    As a result, uncaptured pointers that are known to be dereferenceable
    prior to a call to a function with the ``nofree`` attribute are still
    known to be dereferenceable after the call. The capturing condition is
    necessary in environments where the function might communicate the
    pointer to another thread which then deallocates the memory.  Alternatively,
    ``nosync`` would ensure such communication cannot happen and even captured
    pointers cannot be freed by the function.

    A ``nofree`` function is explicitly allowed to free memory which it
    allocated or (if not ``nosync``) arrange for another thread to free
    memory on it's behalf.  As a result, perhaps surprisingly, a ``nofree``
    function can return a pointer to a previously deallocated memory object.
``noimplicitfloat``
    Disallows implicit floating-point code. This inhibits optimizations that
    use floating-point code and floating-point registers for operations that are
    not nominally floating-point. LLVM instructions that perform floating-point
    operations or require access to floating-point registers may still cause
    floating-point code to be generated.

    Also inhibits optimizations that create SIMD/vector code and registers from
    scalar code such as vectorization or memcpy/memset optimization. This
    includes integer vectors. Vector instructions present in IR may still cause
    vector code to be generated.
``noinline``
    This attribute indicates that the inliner should never inline this
    function in any situation. This attribute may not be used together
    with the ``alwaysinline`` attribute.
``nomerge``
    This attribute indicates that calls to this function should never be merged
    during optimization. For example, it will prevent tail merging otherwise
    identical code sequences that raise an exception or terminate the program.
    Tail merging normally reduces the precision of source location information,
    making stack traces less useful for debugging. This attribute gives the
    user control over the tradeoff between code size and debug information
    precision.
``nonlazybind``
    This attribute suppresses lazy symbol binding for the function. This
    may make calls to the function faster, at the cost of extra program
    startup time if the function is not called during program startup.
``noprofile``
    This function attribute prevents instrumentation based profiling, used for
    coverage or profile based optimization, from being added to a function. It
    also blocks inlining if the caller and callee have different values of this
    attribute.
``skipprofile``
    This function attribute prevents instrumentation based profiling, used for
    coverage or profile based optimization, from being added to a function. This
    attribute does not restrict inlining, so instrumented instruction could end
    up in this function.
``noredzone``
    This attribute indicates that the code generator should not use a
    red zone, even if the target-specific ABI normally permits it.
``indirect-tls-seg-refs``
    This attribute indicates that the code generator should not use
    direct TLS access through segment registers, even if the
    target-specific ABI normally permits it.
``noreturn``
    This function attribute indicates that the function never returns
    normally, hence through a return instruction. This produces undefined
    behavior at runtime if the function ever does dynamically return. Annotated
    functions may still raise an exception, i.a., ``nounwind`` is not implied.
``norecurse``
    This function attribute indicates that the function does not call itself
    either directly or indirectly down any possible call path. This produces
    undefined behavior at runtime if the function ever does recurse.

.. _langref_willreturn:

``willreturn``
    This function attribute indicates that a call of this function will
    either exhibit undefined behavior or comes back and continues execution
    at a point in the existing call stack that includes the current invocation.
    Annotated functions may still raise an exception, i.a., ``nounwind`` is not implied.
    If an invocation of an annotated function does not return control back
    to a point in the call stack, the behavior is undefined.
``nosync``
    This function attribute indicates that the function does not communicate
    (synchronize) with another thread through memory or other well-defined means.
    Synchronization is considered possible in the presence of `atomic` accesses
    that enforce an order, thus not "unordered" and "monotonic", `volatile` accesses,
    as well as `convergent` function calls.

    Note that `convergent` operations can involve communication that is
    considered to be not through memory and does not necessarily imply an
    ordering between threads for the purposes of the memory model. Therefore,
    an operation can be both `convergent` and `nosync`.

    If a `nosync` function does ever synchronize with another thread,
    the behavior is undefined.
``nounwind``
    This function attribute indicates that the function never raises an
    exception. If the function does raise an exception, its runtime
    behavior is undefined. However, functions marked nounwind may still
    trap or generate asynchronous exceptions. Exception handling schemes
    that are recognized by LLVM to handle asynchronous exceptions, such
    as SEH, will still provide their implementation defined semantics.
``nosanitize_bounds``
    This attribute indicates that bounds checking sanitizer instrumentation
    is disabled for this function.
``nosanitize_coverage``
    This attribute indicates that SanitizerCoverage instrumentation is disabled
    for this function.
``null_pointer_is_valid``
   If ``null_pointer_is_valid`` is set, then the ``null`` address
   in address-space 0 is considered to be a valid address for memory loads and
   stores. Any analysis or optimization should not treat dereferencing a
   pointer to ``null`` as undefined behavior in this function.
   Note: Comparing address of a global variable to ``null`` may still
   evaluate to false because of a limitation in querying this attribute inside
   constant expressions.
``optdebug``
    This attribute suggests that optimization passes and code generator passes
    should make choices that try to preserve debug info without significantly
    degrading runtime performance.
    This attribute is incompatible with the ``minsize``, ``optsize``, and
    ``optnone`` attributes.
``optforfuzzing``
    This attribute indicates that this function should be optimized
    for maximum fuzzing signal.
``optnone``
    This function attribute indicates that most optimization passes will skip
    this function, with the exception of interprocedural optimization passes.
    Code generation defaults to the "fast" instruction selector.
    This attribute cannot be used together with the ``alwaysinline``
    attribute; this attribute is also incompatible
    with the ``minsize``, ``optsize``, and ``optdebug`` attributes.

    This attribute requires the ``noinline`` attribute to be specified on
    the function as well, so the function is never inlined into any caller.
    Only functions with the ``alwaysinline`` attribute are valid
    candidates for inlining into the body of this function.
``optsize``
    This attribute suggests that optimization passes and code generator
    passes make choices that keep the code size of this function low,
    and otherwise do optimizations specifically to reduce code size as
    long as they do not significantly impact runtime performance.
    This attribute is incompatible with the ``optdebug`` and ``optnone``
    attributes.
``"patchable-function"``
    This attribute tells the code generator that the code
    generated for this function needs to follow certain conventions that
    make it possible for a runtime function to patch over it later.
    The exact effect of this attribute depends on its string value,
    for which there currently is one legal possibility:

     * ``"prologue-short-redirect"`` - This style of patchable
       function is intended to support patching a function prologue to
       redirect control away from the function in a thread safe
       manner.  It guarantees that the first instruction of the
       function will be large enough to accommodate a short jump
       instruction, and will be sufficiently aligned to allow being
       fully changed via an atomic compare-and-swap instruction.
       While the first requirement can be satisfied by inserting large
       enough NOP, LLVM can and will try to re-purpose an existing
       instruction (i.e. one that would have to be emitted anyway) as
       the patchable instruction larger than a short jump.

       ``"prologue-short-redirect"`` is currently only supported on
       x86-64.

    This attribute by itself does not imply restrictions on
    inter-procedural optimizations.  All of the semantic effects the
    patching may have to be separately conveyed via the linkage type.
``"probe-stack"``
    This attribute indicates that the function will trigger a guard region
    in the end of the stack. It ensures that accesses to the stack must be
    no further apart than the size of the guard region to a previous
    access of the stack. It takes one required string value, the name of
    the stack probing function that will be called.

    If a function that has a ``"probe-stack"`` attribute is inlined into
    a function with another ``"probe-stack"`` attribute, the resulting
    function has the ``"probe-stack"`` attribute of the caller. If a
    function that has a ``"probe-stack"`` attribute is inlined into a
    function that has no ``"probe-stack"`` attribute at all, the resulting
    function has the ``"probe-stack"`` attribute of the callee.
``"stack-probe-size"``
    This attribute controls the behavior of stack probes: either
    the ``"probe-stack"`` attribute, or ABI-required stack probes, if any.
    It defines the size of the guard region. It ensures that if the function
    may use more stack space than the size of the guard region, stack probing
    sequence will be emitted. It takes one required integer value, which
    is 4096 by default.

    If a function that has a ``"stack-probe-size"`` attribute is inlined into
    a function with another ``"stack-probe-size"`` attribute, the resulting
    function has the ``"stack-probe-size"`` attribute that has the lower
    numeric value. If a function that has a ``"stack-probe-size"`` attribute is
    inlined into a function that has no ``"stack-probe-size"`` attribute
    at all, the resulting function has the ``"stack-probe-size"`` attribute
    of the callee.
``"no-stack-arg-probe"``
    This attribute disables ABI-required stack probes, if any.
``returns_twice``
    This attribute indicates that this function can return twice. The C
    ``setjmp`` is an example of such a function. The compiler disables
    some optimizations (like tail calls) in the caller of these
    functions.
``safestack``
    This attribute indicates that
    `SafeStack <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/SafeStack.html>`_
    protection is enabled for this function.

    If a function that has a ``safestack`` attribute is inlined into a
    function that doesn't have a ``safestack`` attribute or which has an
    ``ssp``, ``sspstrong`` or ``sspreq`` attribute, then the resulting
    function will have a ``safestack`` attribute.
``sanitize_address``
    This attribute indicates that AddressSanitizer checks
    (dynamic address safety analysis) are enabled for this function.
``sanitize_memory``
    This attribute indicates that MemorySanitizer checks (dynamic detection
    of accesses to uninitialized memory) are enabled for this function.
``sanitize_thread``
    This attribute indicates that ThreadSanitizer checks
    (dynamic thread safety analysis) are enabled for this function.
``sanitize_hwaddress``
    This attribute indicates that HWAddressSanitizer checks
    (dynamic address safety analysis based on tagged pointers) are enabled for
    this function.
``sanitize_memtag``
    This attribute indicates that MemTagSanitizer checks
    (dynamic address safety analysis based on Armv8 MTE) are enabled for
    this function.
``speculative_load_hardening``
    This attribute indicates that
    `Speculative Load Hardening <https://llvm.org/docs/SpeculativeLoadHardening.html>`_
    should be enabled for the function body.

    Speculative Load Hardening is a best-effort mitigation against
    information leak attacks that make use of control flow
    miss-speculation - specifically miss-speculation of whether a branch
    is taken or not. Typically vulnerabilities enabling such attacks are
    classified as "Spectre variant #1". Notably, this does not attempt to
    mitigate against miss-speculation of branch target, classified as
    "Spectre variant #2" vulnerabilities.

    When inlining, the attribute is sticky. Inlining a function that carries
    this attribute will cause the caller to gain the attribute. This is intended
    to provide a maximally conservative model where the code in a function
    annotated with this attribute will always (even after inlining) end up
    hardened.
``speculatable``
    This function attribute indicates that the function does not have any
    effects besides calculating its result and does not have undefined behavior.
    Note that ``speculatable`` is not enough to conclude that along any
    particular execution path the number of calls to this function will not be
    externally observable. This attribute is only valid on functions
    and declarations, not on individual call sites. If a function is
    incorrectly marked as speculatable and really does exhibit
    undefined behavior, the undefined behavior may be observed even
    if the call site is dead code.

``ssp``
    This attribute indicates that the function should emit a stack
    smashing protector. It is in the form of a "canary" --- a random value
    placed on the stack before the local variables that's checked upon
    return from the function to see if it has been overwritten. A
    heuristic is used to determine if a function needs stack protectors
    or not. The heuristic used will enable protectors for functions with:

    - Character arrays larger than ``ssp-buffer-size`` (default 8).
    - Aggregates containing character arrays larger than ``ssp-buffer-size``.
    - Calls to alloca() with variable sizes or constant sizes greater than
      ``ssp-buffer-size``.

    Variables that are identified as requiring a protector will be arranged
    on the stack such that they are adjacent to the stack protector guard.

    If a function with an ``ssp`` attribute is inlined into a calling function,
    the attribute is not carried over to the calling function.

``sspstrong``
    This attribute indicates that the function should emit a stack smashing
    protector. This attribute causes a strong heuristic to be used when
    determining if a function needs stack protectors. The strong heuristic
    will enable protectors for functions with:

    - Arrays of any size and type
    - Aggregates containing an array of any size and type.
    - Calls to alloca().
    - Local variables that have had their address taken.

    Variables that are identified as requiring a protector will be arranged
    on the stack such that they are adjacent to the stack protector guard.
    The specific layout rules are:

    #. Large arrays and structures containing large arrays
       (``>= ssp-buffer-size``) are closest to the stack protector.
    #. Small arrays and structures containing small arrays
       (``< ssp-buffer-size``) are 2nd closest to the protector.
    #. Variables that have had their address taken are 3rd closest to the
       protector.

    This overrides the ``ssp`` function attribute.

    If a function with an ``sspstrong`` attribute is inlined into a calling
    function which has an ``ssp`` attribute, the calling function's attribute
    will be upgraded to ``sspstrong``.

``sspreq``
    This attribute indicates that the function should *always* emit a stack
    smashing protector. This overrides the ``ssp`` and ``sspstrong`` function
    attributes.

    Variables that are identified as requiring a protector will be arranged
    on the stack such that they are adjacent to the stack protector guard.
    The specific layout rules are:

    #. Large arrays and structures containing large arrays
       (``>= ssp-buffer-size``) are closest to the stack protector.
    #. Small arrays and structures containing small arrays
       (``< ssp-buffer-size``) are 2nd closest to the protector.
    #. Variables that have had their address taken are 3rd closest to the
       protector.

    If a function with an ``sspreq`` attribute is inlined into a calling
    function which has an ``ssp`` or ``sspstrong`` attribute, the calling
    function's attribute will be upgraded to ``sspreq``.

``strictfp``
    This attribute indicates that the function was called from a scope that
    requires strict floating-point semantics.  LLVM will not attempt any
    optimizations that require assumptions about the floating-point rounding
    mode or that might alter the state of floating-point status flags that
    might otherwise be set or cleared by calling this function. LLVM will
    not introduce any new floating-point instructions that may trap.

.. _denormal_fp_math:

``"denormal-fp-math"``
    This indicates the denormal (subnormal) handling that may be
    assumed for the default floating-point environment. This is a
    comma separated pair. The elements may be one of ``"ieee"``,
    ``"preserve-sign"``, ``"positive-zero"``, or ``"dynamic"``. The
    first entry indicates the flushing mode for the result of floating
    point operations. The second indicates the handling of denormal inputs
    to floating point instructions. For compatibility with older
    bitcode, if the second value is omitted, both input and output
    modes will assume the same mode.

    If this is attribute is not specified, the default is ``"ieee,ieee"``.

    If the output mode is ``"preserve-sign"``, or ``"positive-zero"``,
    denormal outputs may be flushed to zero by standard floating-point
    operations. It is not mandated that flushing to zero occurs, but if
    a denormal output is flushed to zero, it must respect the sign
    mode. Not all targets support all modes.

    If the mode is ``"dynamic"``, the behavior is derived from the
    dynamic state of the floating-point environment. Transformations
    which depend on the behavior of denormal values should not be
    performed.

    While this indicates the expected floating point mode the function
    will be executed with, this does not make any attempt to ensure
    the mode is consistent. User or platform code is expected to set
    the floating point mode appropriately before function entry.

    If the input mode is ``"preserve-sign"``, or ``"positive-zero"``,
    a floating-point operation must treat any input denormal value as
    zero. In some situations, if an instruction does not respect this
    mode, the input may need to be converted to 0 as if by
    ``@llvm.canonicalize`` during lowering for correctness.

``"denormal-fp-math-f32"``
    Same as ``"denormal-fp-math"``, but only controls the behavior of
    the 32-bit float type (or vectors of 32-bit floats). If both are
    are present, this overrides ``"denormal-fp-math"``. Not all targets
    support separately setting the denormal mode per type, and no
    attempt is made to diagnose unsupported uses. Currently this
    attribute is respected by the AMDGPU and NVPTX backends.

``"thunk"``
    This attribute indicates that the function will delegate to some other
    function with a tail call. The prototype of a thunk should not be used for
    optimization purposes. The caller is expected to cast the thunk prototype to
    match the thunk target prototype.

``"tls-load-hoist"``
    This attribute indicates that the function will try to reduce redundant
    tls address calculation by hoisting tls variable.

``uwtable[(sync|async)]``
    This attribute indicates that the ABI being targeted requires that
    an unwind table entry be produced for this function even if we can
    show that no exceptions passes by it. This is normally the case for
    the ELF x86-64 abi, but it can be disabled for some compilation
    units. The optional parameter describes what kind of unwind tables
    to generate: ``sync`` for normal unwind tables, ``async`` for asynchronous
    (instruction precise) unwind tables. Without the parameter, the attribute
    ``uwtable`` is equivalent to ``uwtable(async)``.
``nocf_check``
    This attribute indicates that no control-flow check will be performed on
    the attributed entity. It disables -fcf-protection=<> for a specific
    entity to fine grain the HW control flow protection mechanism. The flag
    is target independent and currently appertains to a function or function
    pointer.
``shadowcallstack``
    This attribute indicates that the ShadowCallStack checks are enabled for
    the function. The instrumentation checks that the return address for the
    function has not changed between the function prolog and epilog. It is
    currently x86_64-specific.

.. _langref_mustprogress:

``mustprogress``
    This attribute indicates that the function is required to return, unwind,
    or interact with the environment in an observable way e.g. via a volatile
    memory access, I/O, or other synchronization.  The ``mustprogress``
    attribute is intended to model the requirements of the first section of
    [intro.progress] of the C++ Standard. As a consequence, a loop in a
    function with the ``mustprogress`` attribute can be assumed to terminate if
    it does not interact with the environment in an observable way, and
    terminating loops without side-effects can be removed. If a ``mustprogress``
    function does not satisfy this contract, the behavior is undefined. If a
    ``mustprogress`` function calls a function not marked ``mustprogress``,
    and that function never returns, the program is well-defined even if there
    isn't any other observable progress.  Note that ``willreturn`` implies
    ``mustprogress``.
``"warn-stack-size"="<threshold>"``
    This attribute sets a threshold to emit diagnostics once the frame size is
    known should the frame size exceed the specified value.  It takes one
    required integer value, which should be a non-negative integer, and less
    than `UINT_MAX`.  It's unspecified which threshold will be used when
    duplicate definitions are linked together with differing values.
``vscale_range(<min>[, <max>])``
    This function attribute indicates `vscale` is a power-of-two within a
    specified range. `min` must be a power-of-two that is greater than 0. When
    specified, `max` must be a power-of-two greater-than-or-equal to `min` or 0
    to signify an unbounded maximum. The syntax `vscale_range(<val>)` can be
    used to set both `min` and `max` to the same value. Functions that don't
    include this attribute make no assumptions about the value of `vscale`.
``"nooutline"``
    This attribute indicates that outlining passes should not modify the
    function.

Call Site Attributes
----------------------

In addition to function attributes the following call site only
attributes are supported:

``vector-function-abi-variant``
    This attribute can be attached to a :ref:`call <i_call>` to list
    the vector functions associated to the function. Notice that the
    attribute cannot be attached to a :ref:`invoke <i_invoke>` or a
    :ref:`callbr <i_callbr>` instruction. The attribute consists of a
    comma separated list of mangled names. The order of the list does
    not imply preference (it is logically a set). The compiler is free
    to pick any listed vector function of its choosing.

    The syntax for the mangled names is as follows:::

        _ZGV<isa><mask><vlen><parameters>_<scalar_name>[(<vector_redirection>)]

    When present, the attribute informs the compiler that the function
    ``<scalar_name>`` has a corresponding vector variant that can be
    used to perform the concurrent invocation of ``<scalar_name>`` on
    vectors. The shape of the vector function is described by the
    tokens between the prefix ``_ZGV`` and the ``<scalar_name>``
    token. The standard name of the vector function is
    ``_ZGV<isa><mask><vlen><parameters>_<scalar_name>``. When present,
    the optional token ``(<vector_redirection>)`` informs the compiler
    that a custom name is provided in addition to the standard one
    (custom names can be provided for example via the use of ``declare
    variant`` in OpenMP 5.0). The declaration of the variant must be
    present in the IR Module. The signature of the vector variant is
    determined by the rules of the Vector Function ABI (VFABI)
    specifications of the target. For Arm and X86, the VFABI can be
    found at https://github.com/ARM-software/abi-aa and
    https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/download/vector-simd-function-abi.html,
    respectively.

    For X86 and Arm targets, the values of the tokens in the standard
    name are those that are defined in the VFABI. LLVM has an internal
    ``<isa>`` token that can be used to create scalar-to-vector
    mappings for functions that are not directly associated to any of
    the target ISAs (for example, some of the mappings stored in the
    TargetLibraryInfo). Valid values for the ``<isa>`` token are:::

        <isa>:= b | c | d | e  -> X86 SSE, AVX, AVX2, AVX512
              | n | s          -> Armv8 Advanced SIMD, SVE
              | __LLVM__       -> Internal LLVM Vector ISA

    For all targets currently supported (x86, Arm and Internal LLVM),
    the remaining tokens can have the following values:::

        <mask>:= M | N         -> mask | no mask

        <vlen>:= number        -> number of lanes
               | x             -> VLA (Vector Length Agnostic)

        <parameters>:= v              -> vector
                     | l | l <number> -> linear
                     | R | R <number> -> linear with ref modifier
                     | L | L <number> -> linear with val modifier
                     | U | U <number> -> linear with uval modifier
                     | ls <pos>       -> runtime linear
                     | Rs <pos>       -> runtime linear with ref modifier
                     | Ls <pos>       -> runtime linear with val modifier
                     | Us <pos>       -> runtime linear with uval modifier
                     | u              -> uniform

        <scalar_name>:= name of the scalar function

        <vector_redirection>:= optional, custom name of the vector function

``preallocated(<ty>)``
    This attribute is required on calls to ``llvm.call.preallocated.arg``
    and cannot be used on any other call. See
    :ref:`llvm.call.preallocated.arg<int_call_preallocated_arg>` for more
    details.

.. _glattrs:

Global Attributes
-----------------

Attributes may be set to communicate additional information about a global variable.
Unlike :ref:`function attributes <fnattrs>`, attributes on a global variable
are grouped into a single :ref:`attribute group <attrgrp>`.

``no_sanitize_address``
    This attribute indicates that the global variable should not have
    AddressSanitizer instrumentation applied to it, because it was annotated
    with `__attribute__((no_sanitize("address")))`,
    `__attribute__((disable_sanitizer_instrumentation))`, or included in the
    `-fsanitize-ignorelist` file.
``no_sanitize_hwaddress``
    This attribute indicates that the global variable should not have
    HWAddressSanitizer instrumentation applied to it, because it was annotated
    with `__attribute__((no_sanitize("hwaddress")))`,
    `__attribute__((disable_sanitizer_instrumentation))`, or included in the
    `-fsanitize-ignorelist` file.
``sanitize_memtag``
    This attribute indicates that the global variable should have AArch64 memory
    tags (MTE) instrumentation applied to it. This attribute causes the
    suppression of certain optimizations, like GlobalMerge, as well as ensuring
    extra directives are emitted in the assembly and extra bits of metadata are
    placed in the object file so that the linker can ensure the accesses are
    protected by MTE. This attribute is added by clang when
    `-fsanitize=memtag-globals` is provided, as long as the global is not marked
    with `__attribute__((no_sanitize("memtag")))`,
    `__attribute__((disable_sanitizer_instrumentation))`, or included in the
    `-fsanitize-ignorelist` file. The AArch64 Globals Tagging pass may remove
    this attribute when it's not possible to tag the global (e.g. it's a TLS
    variable).
``sanitize_address_dyninit``
    This attribute indicates that the global variable, when instrumented with
    AddressSanitizer, should be checked for ODR violations. This attribute is
    applied to global variables that are dynamically initialized according to
    C++ rules.

.. _opbundles:

Operand Bundles
---------------

Operand bundles are tagged sets of SSA values that can be associated
with certain LLVM instructions (currently only ``call`` s and
``invoke`` s).  In a way they are like metadata, but dropping them is
incorrect and will change program semantics.

Syntax::

    operand bundle set ::= '[' operand bundle (, operand bundle )* ']'
    operand bundle ::= tag '(' [ bundle operand ] (, bundle operand )* ')'
    bundle operand ::= SSA value
    tag ::= string constant

Operand bundles are **not** part of a function's signature, and a
given function may be called from multiple places with different kinds
of operand bundles.  This reflects the fact that the operand bundles
are conceptually a part of the ``call`` (or ``invoke``), not the
callee being dispatched to.

Operand bundles are a generic mechanism intended to support
runtime-introspection-like functionality for managed languages.  While
the exact semantics of an operand bundle depend on the bundle tag,
there are certain limitations to how much the presence of an operand
bundle can influence the semantics of a program.  These restrictions
are described as the semantics of an "unknown" operand bundle.  As
long as the behavior of an operand bundle is describable within these
restrictions, LLVM does not need to have special knowledge of the
operand bundle to not miscompile programs containing it.

- The bundle operands for an unknown operand bundle escape in unknown
  ways before control is transferred to the callee or invokee.
- Calls and invokes with operand bundles have unknown read / write
  effect on the heap on entry and exit (even if the call target specifies
  a ``memory`` attribute), unless they're overridden with
  callsite specific attributes.
- An operand bundle at a call site cannot change the implementation
  of the called function.  Inter-procedural optimizations work as
  usual as long as they take into account the first two properties.

More specific types of operand bundles are described below.

.. _deopt_opbundles:

Deoptimization Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Deoptimization operand bundles are characterized by the ``"deopt"``
operand bundle tag.  These operand bundles represent an alternate
"safe" continuation for the call site they're attached to, and can be
used by a suitable runtime to deoptimize the compiled frame at the
specified call site.  There can be at most one ``"deopt"`` operand
bundle attached to a call site.  Exact details of deoptimization is
out of scope for the language reference, but it usually involves
rewriting a compiled frame into a set of interpreted frames.

From the compiler's perspective, deoptimization operand bundles make
the call sites they're attached to at least ``readonly``.  They read
through all of their pointer typed operands (even if they're not
otherwise escaped) and the entire visible heap.  Deoptimization
operand bundles do not capture their operands except during
deoptimization, in which case control will not be returned to the
compiled frame.

The inliner knows how to inline through calls that have deoptimization
operand bundles.  Just like inlining through a normal call site
involves composing the normal and exceptional continuations, inlining
through a call site with a deoptimization operand bundle needs to
appropriately compose the "safe" deoptimization continuation.  The
inliner does this by prepending the parent's deoptimization
continuation to every deoptimization continuation in the inlined body.
E.g. inlining ``@f`` into ``@g`` in the following example

.. code-block:: llvm

    define void @f() {
      call void @x()  ;; no deopt state
      call void @y() [ "deopt"(i32 10) ]
      call void @y() [ "deopt"(i32 10), "unknown"(ptr null) ]
      ret void
    }

    define void @g() {
      call void @f() [ "deopt"(i32 20) ]
      ret void
    }

will result in

.. code-block:: llvm

    define void @g() {
      call void @x()  ;; still no deopt state
      call void @y() [ "deopt"(i32 20, i32 10) ]
      call void @y() [ "deopt"(i32 20, i32 10), "unknown"(ptr null) ]
      ret void
    }

It is the frontend's responsibility to structure or encode the
deoptimization state in a way that syntactically prepending the
caller's deoptimization state to the callee's deoptimization state is
semantically equivalent to composing the caller's deoptimization
continuation after the callee's deoptimization continuation.

.. _ob_funclet:

Funclet Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Funclet operand bundles are characterized by the ``"funclet"``
operand bundle tag.  These operand bundles indicate that a call site
is within a particular funclet.  There can be at most one
``"funclet"`` operand bundle attached to a call site and it must have
exactly one bundle operand.

If any funclet EH pads have been "entered" but not "exited" (per the
`description in the EH doc\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh-constraints>`_),
it is undefined behavior to execute a ``call`` or ``invoke`` which:

* does not have a ``"funclet"`` bundle and is not a ``call`` to a nounwind
  intrinsic, or
* has a ``"funclet"`` bundle whose operand is not the most-recently-entered
  not-yet-exited funclet EH pad.

Similarly, if no funclet EH pads have been entered-but-not-yet-exited,
executing a ``call`` or ``invoke`` with a ``"funclet"`` bundle is undefined behavior.

GC Transition Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

GC transition operand bundles are characterized by the
``"gc-transition"`` operand bundle tag. These operand bundles mark a
call as a transition between a function with one GC strategy to a
function with a different GC strategy. If coordinating the transition
between GC strategies requires additional code generation at the call
site, these bundles may contain any values that are needed by the
generated code.  For more details, see :ref:`GC Transitions
<gc_transition_args>`.

The bundle contain an arbitrary list of Values which need to be passed
to GC transition code. They will be lowered and passed as operands to
the appropriate GC_TRANSITION nodes in the selection DAG. It is assumed
that these arguments must be available before and after (but not
necessarily during) the execution of the callee.

.. _assume_opbundles:

Assume Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Operand bundles on an :ref:`llvm.assume <int_assume>` allows representing
assumptions, such as that a :ref:`parameter attribute <paramattrs>` or a
:ref:`function attribute <fnattrs>` holds for a certain value at a certain
location. Operand bundles enable assumptions that are either hard or impossible
to represent as a boolean argument of an :ref:`llvm.assume <int_assume>`.

An assume operand bundle has the form:

::

      "<tag>"([ <arguments>] ])

In the case of function or parameter attributes, the operand bundle has the
restricted form:

::

      "<tag>"([ <holds for value> [, <attribute argument>] ])

* The tag of the operand bundle is usually the name of attribute that can be
  assumed to hold. It can also be `ignore`, this tag doesn't contain any
  information and should be ignored.
* The first argument if present is the value for which the attribute hold.
* The second argument if present is an argument of the attribute.

If there are no arguments the attribute is a property of the call location.

For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

      call void @llvm.assume(i1 true) ["align"(ptr %val, i32 8)]

allows the optimizer to assume that at location of call to
:ref:`llvm.assume <int_assume>` ``%val`` has an alignment of at least 8.

.. code-block:: llvm

      call void @llvm.assume(i1 %cond) ["cold"(), "nonnull"(ptr %val)]

allows the optimizer to assume that the :ref:`llvm.assume <int_assume>`
call location is cold and that ``%val`` may not be null.

Just like for the argument of :ref:`llvm.assume <int_assume>`, if any of the
provided guarantees are violated at runtime the behavior is undefined.

While attributes expect constant arguments, assume operand bundles may be
provided a dynamic value, for example:

.. code-block:: llvm

      call void @llvm.assume(i1 true) ["align"(ptr %val, i32 %align)]

If the operand bundle value violates any requirements on the attribute value,
the behavior is undefined, unless one of the following exceptions applies:

* ``"align"`` operand bundles may specify a non-power-of-two alignment
  (including a zero alignment). If this is the case, then the pointer value
  must be a null pointer, otherwise the behavior is undefined.

In addition to allowing operand bundles encoding function and parameter
attributes, an assume operand bundle my also encode a ``separate_storage``
operand bundle. This has the form:

.. code-block:: llvm

    separate_storage(<val1>, <val2>)``

This indicates that no pointer :ref:`based <pointeraliasing>` on one of its
arguments can alias any pointer based on the other.

Even if the assumed property can be encoded as a boolean value, like
``nonnull``, using operand bundles to express the property can still have
benefits:

* Attributes that can be expressed via operand bundles are directly the
  property that the optimizer uses and cares about. Encoding attributes as
  operand bundles removes the need for an instruction sequence that represents
  the property (e.g., `icmp ne ptr %p, null` for `nonnull`) and for the
  optimizer to deduce the property from that instruction sequence.
* Expressing the property using operand bundles makes it easy to identify the
  use of the value as a use in an :ref:`llvm.assume <int_assume>`. This then
  simplifies and improves heuristics, e.g., for use "use-sensitive"
  optimizations.

.. _ob_preallocated:

Preallocated Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Preallocated operand bundles are characterized by the ``"preallocated"``
operand bundle tag.  These operand bundles allow separation of the allocation
of the call argument memory from the call site.  This is necessary to pass
non-trivially copyable objects by value in a way that is compatible with MSVC
on some targets.  There can be at most one ``"preallocated"`` operand bundle
attached to a call site and it must have exactly one bundle operand, which is
a token generated by ``@llvm.call.preallocated.setup``.  A call with this
operand bundle should not adjust the stack before entering the function, as
that will have been done by one of the ``@llvm.call.preallocated.*`` intrinsics.

.. code-block:: llvm

      %foo = type { i64, i32 }

      ...

      %t = call token @llvm.call.preallocated.setup(i32 1)
      %a = call ptr @llvm.call.preallocated.arg(token %t, i32 0) preallocated(%foo)
      ; initialize %b
      call void @bar(i32 42, ptr preallocated(%foo) %a) ["preallocated"(token %t)]

.. _ob_gc_live:

GC Live Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A "gc-live" operand bundle is only valid on a :ref:`gc.statepoint <gc_statepoint>`
intrinsic. The operand bundle must contain every pointer to a garbage collected
object which potentially needs to be updated by the garbage collector.

When lowered, any relocated value will be recorded in the corresponding
:ref:`stackmap entry <statepoint-stackmap-format>`.  See the intrinsic description
for further details.

ObjC ARC Attached Call Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A ``"clang.arc.attachedcall"`` operand bundle on a call indicates the call is
implicitly followed by a marker instruction and a call to an ObjC runtime
function that uses the result of the call. The operand bundle takes a mandatory
pointer to the runtime function (``@objc_retainAutoreleasedReturnValue`` or
``@objc_unsafeClaimAutoreleasedReturnValue``).
The return value of a call with this bundle is used by a call to
``@llvm.objc.clang.arc.noop.use`` unless the called function's return type is
void, in which case the operand bundle is ignored.

.. code-block:: llvm

   ; The marker instruction and a runtime function call are inserted after the call
   ; to @foo.
   call ptr @foo() [ "clang.arc.attachedcall"(ptr @objc_retainAutoreleasedReturnValue) ]
   call ptr @foo() [ "clang.arc.attachedcall"(ptr @objc_unsafeClaimAutoreleasedReturnValue) ]

The operand bundle is needed to ensure the call is immediately followed by the
marker instruction and the ObjC runtime call in the final output.

.. _ob_ptrauth:

Pointer Authentication Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Pointer Authentication operand bundles are characterized by the
``"ptrauth"`` operand bundle tag.  They are described in the
`Pointer Authentication <PointerAuth.html#operand-bundle>`__ document.

.. _ob_kcfi:

KCFI Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A ``"kcfi"`` operand bundle on an indirect call indicates that the call will
be preceded by a runtime type check, which validates that the call target is
prefixed with a :ref:`type identifier<md_kcfi_type>` that matches the operand
bundle attribute. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

      call void %0() ["kcfi"(i32 1234)]

Clang emits KCFI operand bundles and the necessary metadata with
``-fsanitize=kcfi``.

.. _convergencectrl:

Convergence Control Operand Bundles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A "convergencectrl" operand bundle is only valid on a ``convergent`` operation.
When present, the operand bundle must contain exactly one value of token type.
See the :doc:`ConvergentOperations` document for details.

.. _moduleasm:

Module-Level Inline Assembly
----------------------------

Modules may contain "module-level inline asm" blocks, which corresponds
to the GCC "file scope inline asm" blocks. These blocks are internally
concatenated by LLVM and treated as a single unit, but may be separated
in the ``.ll`` file if desired. The syntax is very simple:

.. code-block:: llvm

    module asm "inline asm code goes here"
    module asm "more can go here"

The strings can contain any character by escaping non-printable
characters. The escape sequence used is simply "\\xx" where "xx" is the
two digit hex code for the number.

Note that the assembly string *must* be parseable by LLVM's integrated assembler
(unless it is disabled), even when emitting a ``.s`` file.

.. _langref_datalayout:

Data Layout
-----------

A module may specify a target specific data layout string that specifies
how data is to be laid out in memory. The syntax for the data layout is
simply:

.. code-block:: llvm

    target datalayout = "layout specification"

The *layout specification* consists of a list of specifications
separated by the minus sign character ('-'). Each specification starts
with a letter and may include other information after the letter to
define some aspect of the data layout. The specifications accepted are
as follows:

``E``
    Specifies that the target lays out data in big-endian form. That is,
    the bits with the most significance have the lowest address
    location.
``e``
    Specifies that the target lays out data in little-endian form. That
    is, the bits with the least significance have the lowest address
    location.
``S<size>``
    Specifies the natural alignment of the stack in bits. Alignment
    promotion of stack variables is limited to the natural stack
    alignment to avoid dynamic stack realignment. The stack alignment
    must be a multiple of 8-bits. If omitted, the natural stack
    alignment defaults to "unspecified", which does not prevent any
    alignment promotions.
``P<address space>``
    Specifies the address space that corresponds to program memory.
    Harvard architectures can use this to specify what space LLVM
    should place things such as functions into. If omitted, the
    program memory space defaults to the default address space of 0,
    which corresponds to a Von Neumann architecture that has code
    and data in the same space.
``G<address space>``
    Specifies the address space to be used by default when creating global
    variables. If omitted, the globals address space defaults to the default
    address space 0.
    Note: variable declarations without an address space are always created in
    address space 0, this property only affects the default value to be used
    when creating globals without additional contextual information (e.g. in
    LLVM passes).

.. _alloca_addrspace:

``A<address space>``
    Specifies the address space of objects created by '``alloca``'.
    Defaults to the default address space of 0.
``p[n]:<size>:<abi>[:<pref>][:<idx>]``
    This specifies the *size* of a pointer and its ``<abi>`` and
    ``<pref>``\erred alignments for address space ``n``. ``<pref>`` is optional
    and defaults to ``<abi>``. The fourth parameter ``<idx>`` is the size of the
    index that used for address calculation, which must be less than or equal
    to the pointer size. If not
    specified, the default index size is equal to the pointer size. All sizes
    are in bits. The address space, ``n``, is optional, and if not specified,
    denotes the default address space 0. The value of ``n`` must be
    in the range [1,2^24).
``i<size>:<abi>[:<pref>]``
    This specifies the alignment for an integer type of a given bit
    ``<size>``. The value of ``<size>`` must be in the range [1,2^24).
    ``<pref>`` is optional and defaults to ``<abi>``.
    For ``i8``, the ``<abi>`` value must equal 8,
    that is, ``i8`` must be naturally aligned.
``v<size>:<abi>[:<pref>]``
    This specifies the alignment for a vector type of a given bit
    ``<size>``. The value of ``<size>`` must be in the range [1,2^24).
    ``<pref>`` is optional and defaults to ``<abi>``.
``f<size>:<abi>[:<pref>]``
    This specifies the alignment for a floating-point type of a given bit
    ``<size>``. Only values of ``<size>`` that are supported by the target
    will work. 32 (float) and 64 (double) are supported on all targets; 80
    or 128 (different flavors of long double) are also supported on some
    targets. The value of ``<size>`` must be in the range [1,2^24).
    ``<pref>`` is optional and defaults to ``<abi>``.
``a:<abi>[:<pref>]``
    This specifies the alignment for an object of aggregate type.
    ``<pref>`` is optional and defaults to ``<abi>``.
``F<type><abi>``
    This specifies the alignment for function pointers.
    The options for ``<type>`` are:

    * ``i``: The alignment of function pointers is independent of the alignment
      of functions, and is a multiple of ``<abi>``.
    * ``n``: The alignment of function pointers is a multiple of the explicit
      alignment specified on the function, and is a multiple of ``<abi>``.
``m:<mangling>``
    If present, specifies that llvm names are mangled in the output. Symbols
    prefixed with the mangling escape character ``\01`` are passed through
    directly to the assembler without the escape character. The mangling style
    options are

    * ``e``: ELF mangling: Private symbols get a ``.L`` prefix.
    * ``l``: GOFF mangling: Private symbols get a ``@`` prefix.
    * ``m``: Mips mangling: Private symbols get a ``$`` prefix.
    * ``o``: Mach-O mangling: Private symbols get ``L`` prefix. Other
      symbols get a ``_`` prefix.
    * ``x``: Windows x86 COFF mangling: Private symbols get the usual prefix.
      Regular C symbols get a ``_`` prefix. Functions with ``__stdcall``,
      ``__fastcall``, and ``__vectorcall`` have custom mangling that appends
      ``@N`` where N is the number of bytes used to pass parameters. C++ symbols
      starting with ``?`` are not mangled in any way.
    * ``w``: Windows COFF mangling: Similar to ``x``, except that normal C
      symbols do not receive a ``_`` prefix.
    * ``a``: XCOFF mangling: Private symbols get a ``L..`` prefix.
``n<size1>:<size2>:<size3>...``
    This specifies a set of native integer widths for the target CPU in
    bits. For example, it might contain ``n32`` for 32-bit PowerPC,
    ``n32:64`` for PowerPC 64, or ``n8:16:32:64`` for X86-64. Elements of
    this set are considered to support most general arithmetic operations
    efficiently.
``ni:<address space0>:<address space1>:<address space2>...``
    This specifies pointer types with the specified address spaces
    as :ref:`Non-Integral Pointer Type <nointptrtype>` s.  The ``0``
    address space cannot be specified as non-integral.

On every specification that takes a ``<abi>:<pref>``, specifying the
``<pref>`` alignment is optional. If omitted, the preceding ``:``
should be omitted too and ``<pref>`` will be equal to ``<abi>``.

When constructing the data layout for a given target, LLVM starts with a
default set of specifications which are then (possibly) overridden by
the specifications in the ``datalayout`` keyword. The default
specifications are given in this list:

-  ``e`` - little endian
-  ``p:64:64:64`` - 64-bit pointers with 64-bit alignment.
-  ``p[n]:64:64:64`` - Other address spaces are assumed to be the
   same as the default address space.
-  ``S0`` - natural stack alignment is unspecified
-  ``i1:8:8`` - i1 is 8-bit (byte) aligned
-  ``i8:8:8`` - i8 is 8-bit (byte) aligned as mandated
-  ``i16:16:16`` - i16 is 16-bit aligned
-  ``i32:32:32`` - i32 is 32-bit aligned
-  ``i64:32:64`` - i64 has ABI alignment of 32-bits but preferred
   alignment of 64-bits
-  ``f16:16:16`` - half is 16-bit aligned
-  ``f32:32:32`` - float is 32-bit aligned
-  ``f64:64:64`` - double is 64-bit aligned
-  ``f128:128:128`` - quad is 128-bit aligned
-  ``v64:64:64`` - 64-bit vector is 64-bit aligned
-  ``v128:128:128`` - 128-bit vector is 128-bit aligned
-  ``a:0:64`` - aggregates are 64-bit aligned

When LLVM is determining the alignment for a given type, it uses the
following rules:

#. If the type sought is an exact match for one of the specifications,
   that specification is used.
#. If no match is found, and the type sought is an integer type, then
   the smallest integer type that is larger than the bitwidth of the
   sought type is used. If none of the specifications are larger than
   the bitwidth then the largest integer type is used. For example,
   given the default specifications above, the i7 type will use the
   alignment of i8 (next largest) while both i65 and i256 will use the
   alignment of i64 (largest specified).

The function of the data layout string may not be what you expect.
Notably, this is not a specification from the frontend of what alignment
the code generator should use.

Instead, if specified, the target data layout is required to match what
the ultimate *code generator* expects. This string is used by the
mid-level optimizers to improve code, and this only works if it matches
what the ultimate code generator uses. There is no way to generate IR
that does not embed this target-specific detail into the IR. If you
don't specify the string, the default specifications will be used to
generate a Data Layout and the optimization phases will operate
accordingly and introduce target specificity into the IR with respect to
these default specifications.

.. _langref_triple:

Target Triple
-------------

A module may specify a target triple string that describes the target
host. The syntax for the target triple is simply:

.. code-block:: llvm

    target triple = "x86_64-apple-macosx10.7.0"

The *target triple* string consists of a series of identifiers delimited
by the minus sign character ('-'). The canonical forms are:

::

    ARCHITECTURE-VENDOR-OPERATING_SYSTEM
    ARCHITECTURE-VENDOR-OPERATING_SYSTEM-ENVIRONMENT

This information is passed along to the backend so that it generates
code for the proper architecture. It's possible to override this on the
command line with the ``-mtriple`` command line option.

.. _objectlifetime:

Object Lifetime
----------------------

A memory object, or simply object, is a region of a memory space that is
reserved by a memory allocation such as :ref:`alloca <i_alloca>`, heap
allocation calls, and global variable definitions.
Once it is allocated, the bytes stored in the region can only be read or written
through a pointer that is :ref:`based on <pointeraliasing>` the allocation
value.
If a pointer that is not based on the object tries to read or write to the
object, it is undefined behavior.

A lifetime of a memory object is a property that decides its accessibility.
Unless stated otherwise, a memory object is alive since its allocation, and
dead after its deallocation.
It is undefined behavior to access a memory object that isn't alive, but
operations that don't dereference it such as
:ref:`getelementptr <i_getelementptr>`, :ref:`ptrtoint <i_ptrtoint>` and
:ref:`icmp <i_icmp>` return a valid result.
This explains code motion of these instructions across operations that
impact the object's lifetime.
A stack object's lifetime can be explicitly specified using
:ref:`llvm.lifetime.start <int_lifestart>` and
:ref:`llvm.lifetime.end <int_lifeend>` intrinsic function calls.

.. _pointeraliasing:

Pointer Aliasing Rules
----------------------

Any memory access must be done through a pointer value associated with
an address range of the memory access, otherwise the behavior is
undefined. Pointer values are associated with address ranges according
to the following rules:

-  A pointer value is associated with the addresses associated with any
   value it is *based* on.
-  An address of a global variable is associated with the address range
   of the variable's storage.
-  The result value of an allocation instruction is associated with the
   address range of the allocated storage.
-  A null pointer in the default address-space is associated with no
   address.
-  An :ref:`undef value <undefvalues>` in *any* address-space is
   associated with no address.
-  An integer constant other than zero or a pointer value returned from
   a function not defined within LLVM may be associated with address
   ranges allocated through mechanisms other than those provided by
   LLVM. Such ranges shall not overlap with any ranges of addresses
   allocated by mechanisms provided by LLVM.

A pointer value is *based* on another pointer value according to the
following rules:

-  A pointer value formed from a scalar ``getelementptr`` operation is *based* on
   the pointer-typed operand of the ``getelementptr``.
-  The pointer in lane *l* of the result of a vector ``getelementptr`` operation
   is *based* on the pointer in lane *l* of the vector-of-pointers-typed operand
   of the ``getelementptr``.
-  The result value of a ``bitcast`` is *based* on the operand of the
   ``bitcast``.
-  A pointer value formed by an ``inttoptr`` is *based* on all pointer
   values that contribute (directly or indirectly) to the computation of
   the pointer's value.
-  The "*based* on" relationship is transitive.

Note that this definition of *"based"* is intentionally similar to the
definition of *"based"* in C99, though it is slightly weaker.

LLVM IR does not associate types with memory. The result type of a
``load`` merely indicates the size and alignment of the memory from
which to load, as well as the interpretation of the value. The first
operand type of a ``store`` similarly only indicates the size and
alignment of the store.

Consequently, type-based alias analysis, aka TBAA, aka
``-fstrict-aliasing``, is not applicable to general unadorned LLVM IR.
:ref:`Metadata <metadata>` may be used to encode additional information
which specialized optimization passes may use to implement type-based
alias analysis.

.. _pointercapture:

Pointer Capture
---------------

Given a function call and a pointer that is passed as an argument or stored in
the memory before the call, a pointer is *captured* by the call if it makes a
copy of any part of the pointer that outlives the call.
To be precise, a pointer is captured if one or more of the following conditions
hold:

1. The call stores any bit of the pointer carrying information into a place,
   and the stored bits can be read from the place by the caller after this call
   exits.

.. code-block:: llvm

    @glb  = global ptr null
    @glb2 = global ptr null
    @glb3 = global ptr null
    @glbi = global i32 0

    define ptr @f(ptr %a, ptr %b, ptr %c, ptr %d, ptr %e) {
      store ptr %a, ptr @glb ; %a is captured by this call

      store ptr %b,   ptr @glb2 ; %b isn't captured because the stored value is overwritten by the store below
      store ptr null, ptr @glb2

      store ptr %c,   ptr @glb3
      call void @g() ; If @g makes a copy of %c that outlives this call (@f), %c is captured
      store ptr null, ptr @glb3

      %i = ptrtoint ptr %d to i64
      %j = trunc i64 %i to i32
      store i32 %j, ptr @glbi ; %d is captured

      ret ptr %e ; %e is captured
    }

2. The call stores any bit of the pointer carrying information into a place,
   and the stored bits can be safely read from the place by another thread via
   synchronization.

.. code-block:: llvm

    @lock = global i1 true

    define void @f(ptr %a) {
      store ptr %a, ptr* @glb
      store atomic i1 false, ptr @lock release ; %a is captured because another thread can safely read @glb
      store ptr null, ptr @glb
      ret void
    }

3. The call's behavior depends on any bit of the pointer carrying information.

.. code-block:: llvm

    @glb = global i8 0

    define void @f(ptr %a) {
      %c = icmp eq ptr %a, @glb
      br i1 %c, label %BB_EXIT, label %BB_CONTINUE ; escapes %a
    BB_EXIT:
      call void @exit()
      unreachable
    BB_CONTINUE:
      ret void
    }

4. The pointer is used in a volatile access as its address.


.. _volatile:

Volatile Memory Accesses
------------------------

Certain memory accesses, such as :ref:`load <i_load>`'s,
:ref:`store <i_store>`'s, and :ref:`llvm.memcpy <int_memcpy>`'s may be
marked ``volatile``. The optimizers must not change the number of
volatile operations or change their order of execution relative to other
volatile operations. The optimizers *may* change the order of volatile
operations relative to non-volatile operations. This is not Java's
"volatile" and has no cross-thread synchronization behavior.

A volatile load or store may have additional target-specific semantics.
Any volatile operation can have side effects, and any volatile operation
can read and/or modify state which is not accessible via a regular load
or store in this module. Volatile operations may use addresses which do
not point to memory (like MMIO registers). This means the compiler may
not use a volatile operation to prove a non-volatile access to that
address has defined behavior.

The allowed side-effects for volatile accesses are limited.  If a
non-volatile store to a given address would be legal, a volatile
operation may modify the memory at that address. A volatile operation
may not modify any other memory accessible by the module being compiled.
A volatile operation may not call any code in the current module.

In general (without target specific context), the address space of a
volatile operation may not be changed. Different address spaces may
have different trapping behavior when dereferencing an invalid
pointer.

The compiler may assume execution will continue after a volatile operation,
so operations which modify memory or may have undefined behavior can be
hoisted past a volatile operation.

As an exception to the preceding rule, the compiler may not assume execution
will continue after a volatile store operation. This restriction is necessary
to support the somewhat common pattern in C of intentionally storing to an
invalid pointer to crash the program. In the future, it might make sense to
allow frontends to control this behavior.

IR-level volatile loads and stores cannot safely be optimized into llvm.memcpy
or llvm.memmove intrinsics even when those intrinsics are flagged volatile.
Likewise, the backend should never split or merge target-legal volatile
load/store instructions. Similarly, IR-level volatile loads and stores cannot
change from integer to floating-point or vice versa.

.. admonition:: Rationale

 Platforms may rely on volatile loads and stores of natively supported
 data width to be executed as single instruction. For example, in C
 this holds for an l-value of volatile primitive type with native
 hardware support, but not necessarily for aggregate types. The
 frontend upholds these expectations, which are intentionally
 unspecified in the IR. The rules above ensure that IR transformations
 do not violate the frontend's contract with the language.

.. _memmodel:

Memory Model for Concurrent Operations
--------------------------------------

The LLVM IR does not define any way to start parallel threads of
execution or to register signal handlers. Nonetheless, there are
platform-specific ways to create them, and we define LLVM IR's behavior
in their presence. This model is inspired by the C++ memory model.

For a more informal introduction to this model, see the :doc:`Atomics`.

We define a *happens-before* partial order as the least partial order
that

-  Is a superset of single-thread program order, and
-  When ``a`` *synchronizes-with* ``b``, includes an edge from ``a`` to
   ``b``. *Synchronizes-with* pairs are introduced by platform-specific
   techniques, like pthread locks, thread creation, thread joining,
   etc., and by atomic instructions. (See also :ref:`Atomic Memory Ordering
   Constraints <ordering>`).

Note that program order does not introduce *happens-before* edges
between a thread and signals executing inside that thread.

Every (defined) read operation (load instructions, memcpy, atomic
loads/read-modify-writes, etc.) R reads a series of bytes written by
(defined) write operations (store instructions, atomic
stores/read-modify-writes, memcpy, etc.). For the purposes of this
section, initialized globals are considered to have a write of the
initializer which is atomic and happens before any other read or write
of the memory in question. For each byte of a read R, R\ :sub:`byte`
may see any write to the same byte, except:

-  If write\ :sub:`1`  happens before write\ :sub:`2`, and
   write\ :sub:`2` happens before R\ :sub:`byte`, then
   R\ :sub:`byte` does not see write\ :sub:`1`.
-  If R\ :sub:`byte` happens before write\ :sub:`3`, then
   R\ :sub:`byte` does not see write\ :sub:`3`.

Given that definition, R\ :sub:`byte` is defined as follows:

-  If R is volatile, the result is target-dependent. (Volatile is
   supposed to give guarantees which can support ``sig_atomic_t`` in
   C/C++, and may be used for accesses to addresses that do not behave
   like normal memory. It does not generally provide cross-thread
   synchronization.)
-  Otherwise, if there is no write to the same byte that happens before
   R\ :sub:`byte`, R\ :sub:`byte` returns ``undef`` for that byte.
-  Otherwise, if R\ :sub:`byte` may see exactly one write,
   R\ :sub:`byte` returns the value written by that write.
-  Otherwise, if R is atomic, and all the writes R\ :sub:`byte` may
   see are atomic, it chooses one of the values written. See the :ref:`Atomic
   Memory Ordering Constraints <ordering>` section for additional
   constraints on how the choice is made.
-  Otherwise R\ :sub:`byte` returns ``undef``.

R returns the value composed of the series of bytes it read. This
implies that some bytes within the value may be ``undef`` **without**
the entire value being ``undef``. Note that this only defines the
semantics of the operation; it doesn't mean that targets will emit more
than one instruction to read the series of bytes.

Note that in cases where none of the atomic intrinsics are used, this
model places only one restriction on IR transformations on top of what
is required for single-threaded execution: introducing a store to a byte
which might not otherwise be stored is not allowed in general.
(Specifically, in the case where another thread might write to and read
from an address, introducing a store can change a load that may see
exactly one write into a load that may see multiple writes.)

.. _ordering:

Atomic Memory Ordering Constraints
----------------------------------

Atomic instructions (:ref:`cmpxchg <i_cmpxchg>`,
:ref:`atomicrmw <i_atomicrmw>`, :ref:`fence <i_fence>`,
:ref:`atomic load <i_load>`, and :ref:`atomic store <i_store>`) take
ordering parameters that determine which other atomic instructions on
the same address they *synchronize with*. These semantics implement
the Java or C++ memory models; if these descriptions aren't precise
enough, check those specs (see spec references in the
:doc:`atomics guide <Atomics>`). :ref:`fence <i_fence>` instructions
treat these orderings somewhat differently since they don't take an
address. See that instruction's documentation for details.

For a simpler introduction to the ordering constraints, see the
:doc:`Atomics`.

``unordered``
    The set of values that can be read is governed by the happens-before
    partial order. A value cannot be read unless some operation wrote
    it. This is intended to provide a guarantee strong enough to model
    Java's non-volatile shared variables. This ordering cannot be
    specified for read-modify-write operations; it is not strong enough
    to make them atomic in any interesting way.
``monotonic``
    In addition to the guarantees of ``unordered``, there is a single
    total order for modifications by ``monotonic`` operations on each
    address. All modification orders must be compatible with the
    happens-before order. There is no guarantee that the modification
    orders can be combined to a global total order for the whole program
    (and this often will not be possible). The read in an atomic
    read-modify-write operation (:ref:`cmpxchg <i_cmpxchg>` and
    :ref:`atomicrmw <i_atomicrmw>`) reads the value in the modification
    order immediately before the value it writes. If one atomic read
    happens before another atomic read of the same address, the later
    read must see the same value or a later value in the address's
    modification order. This disallows reordering of ``monotonic`` (or
    stronger) operations on the same address. If an address is written
    ``monotonic``-ally by one thread, and other threads ``monotonic``-ally
    read that address repeatedly, the other threads must eventually see
    the write. This corresponds to the C/C++ ``memory_order_relaxed``.
``acquire``
    In addition to the guarantees of ``monotonic``, a
    *synchronizes-with* edge may be formed with a ``release`` operation.
    This is intended to model C/C++'s ``memory_order_acquire``.
``release``
    In addition to the guarantees of ``monotonic``, if this operation
    writes a value which is subsequently read by an ``acquire``
    operation, it *synchronizes-with* that operation. Furthermore,
    this occurs even if the value written by a ``release`` operation
    has been modified by a read-modify-write operation before being
    read. (Such a set of operations comprises a *release
    sequence*). This corresponds to the C/C++
    ``memory_order_release``.
``acq_rel`` (acquire+release)
    Acts as both an ``acquire`` and ``release`` operation on its
    address. This corresponds to the C/C++ ``memory_order_acq_rel``.
``seq_cst`` (sequentially consistent)
    In addition to the guarantees of ``acq_rel`` (``acquire`` for an
    operation that only reads, ``release`` for an operation that only
    writes), there is a global total order on all
    sequentially-consistent operations on all addresses. Each
    sequentially-consistent read sees the last preceding write to the
    same address in this global order. This corresponds to the C/C++
    ``memory_order_seq_cst`` and Java ``volatile``.

    Note: this global total order is *not* guaranteed to be fully
    consistent with the *happens-before* partial order if
    non-``seq_cst`` accesses are involved. See the C++ standard
    `[atomics.order] <https://wg21.link/atomics.order>`_ section
    for more details on the exact guarantees.

.. _syncscope:

If an atomic operation is marked ``syncscope("singlethread")``, it only
*synchronizes with* and only participates in the seq\_cst total orderings of
other operations running in the same thread (for example, in signal handlers).

If an atomic operation is marked ``syncscope("<target-scope>")``, where
``<target-scope>`` is a target specific synchronization scope, then it is target
dependent if it *synchronizes with* and participates in the seq\_cst total
orderings of other operations.

Otherwise, an atomic operation that is not marked ``syncscope("singlethread")``
or ``syncscope("<target-scope>")`` *synchronizes with* and participates in the
seq\_cst total orderings of other operations that are not marked
``syncscope("singlethread")`` or ``syncscope("<target-scope>")``.

.. _floatenv:

Floating-Point Environment
--------------------------

The default LLVM floating-point environment assumes that traps are disabled and
status flags are not observable. Therefore, floating-point math operations do
not have side effects and may be speculated freely. Results assume the
round-to-nearest rounding mode, and subnormals are assumed to be preserved.

Running LLVM code in an environment where these assumptions are not met can lead
to undefined behavior. The ``strictfp`` and ``denormal-fp-math`` attributes as
well as :ref:`Constrained Floating-Point Intrinsics <constrainedfp>` can be used
to weaken LLVM's assumptions and ensure defined behavior in non-default
floating-point environments; see their respective documentation for details.

.. _floatnan:

Behavior of Floating-Point NaN values
-------------------------------------

A floating-point NaN value consists of a sign bit, a quiet/signaling bit, and a
payload (which makes up the rest of the mantissa except for the quiet/signaling
bit). LLVM assumes that the quiet/signaling bit being set to ``1`` indicates a
quiet NaN (QNaN), and a value of ``0`` indicates a signaling NaN (SNaN). In the
following we will hence just call it the "quiet bit".

The representation bits of a floating-point value do not mutate arbitrarily; in
particular, if there is no floating-point operation being performed, NaN signs,
quiet bits, and payloads are preserved.

For the purpose of this section, ``bitcast`` as well as the following operations
are not "floating-point math operations": ``fneg``, ``llvm.fabs``, and
``llvm.copysign``. These operations act directly on the underlying bit
representation and never change anything except possibly for the sign bit.

For floating-point math operations, unless specified otherwise, the following
rules apply when a NaN value is returned: the result has a non-deterministic
sign; the quiet bit and payload are non-deterministically chosen from the
following set of options:

- The quiet bit is set and the payload is all-zero. ("Preferred NaN" case)
- The quiet bit is set and the payload is copied from any input operand that is
  a NaN. ("Quieting NaN propagation" case)
- The quiet bit and payload are copied from any input operand that is a NaN.
  ("Unchanged NaN propagation" case)
- The quiet bit is set and the payload is picked from a target-specific set of
  "extra" possible NaN payloads. The set can depend on the input operand values.
  This set is empty on x86 and ARM, but can be non-empty on other architectures.
  (For instance, on wasm, if any input NaN does not have the preferred all-zero
  payload or any input NaN is an SNaN, then this set contains all possible
  payloads; otherwise, it is empty. On SPARC, this set consists of the all-one
  payload.)

In particular, if all input NaNs are quiet (or if there are no input NaNs), then
the output NaN is definitely quiet. Signaling NaN outputs can only occur if they
are provided as an input value. For example, "fmul SNaN, 1.0" may be simplified
to SNaN rather than QNaN. Similarly, if all input NaNs are preferred (or if
there are no input NaNs) and the target does not have any "extra" NaN payloads,
then the output NaN is guaranteed to be preferred.

Floating-point math operations are allowed to treat all NaNs as if they were
quiet NaNs. For example, "pow(1.0, SNaN)" may be simplified to 1.0.

Code that requires different behavior than this should use the
:ref:`Constrained Floating-Point Intrinsics <constrainedfp>`.
In particular, constrained intrinsics rule out the "Unchanged NaN propagation"
case; they are guaranteed to return a QNaN.

Unfortunately, due to hard-or-impossible-to-fix issues, LLVM violates its own
specification on some architectures:

- x86-32 without SSE2 enabled may convert floating-point values to x86_fp80 and
  back when performing floating-point math operations; this can lead to results
  with different precision than expected and it can alter NaN values. Since
  optimizations can make contradicting assumptions, this can lead to arbitrary
  miscompilations. See `issue #44218
  <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/44218>`_.
- x86-32 (even with SSE2 enabled) may implicitly perform such a conversion on
  values returned from a function for some calling conventions. See `issue
  #66803 <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/66803>`_.
- Older MIPS versions use the opposite polarity for the quiet/signaling bit, and
  LLVM does not correctly represent this. See `issue #60796
  <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/60796>`_.

.. _fastmath:

Fast-Math Flags
---------------

LLVM IR floating-point operations (:ref:`fneg <i_fneg>`, :ref:`fadd <i_fadd>`,
:ref:`fsub <i_fsub>`, :ref:`fmul <i_fmul>`, :ref:`fdiv <i_fdiv>`,
:ref:`frem <i_frem>`, :ref:`fcmp <i_fcmp>`), :ref:`phi <i_phi>`,
:ref:`select <i_select>` and :ref:`call <i_call>`
may use the following flags to enable otherwise unsafe
floating-point transformations.

``nnan``
   No NaNs - Allow optimizations to assume the arguments and result are not
   NaN. If an argument is a nan, or the result would be a nan, it produces
   a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` instead.

``ninf``
   No Infs - Allow optimizations to assume the arguments and result are not
   +/-Inf. If an argument is +/-Inf, or the result would be +/-Inf, it
   produces a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` instead.

``nsz``
   No Signed Zeros - Allow optimizations to treat the sign of a zero
   argument or zero result as insignificant. This does not imply that -0.0
   is poison and/or guaranteed to not exist in the operation.

``arcp``
   Allow Reciprocal - Allow optimizations to use the reciprocal of an
   argument rather than perform division.

``contract``
   Allow floating-point contraction (e.g. fusing a multiply followed by an
   addition into a fused multiply-and-add). This does not enable reassociation
   to form arbitrary contractions. For example, ``(a*b) + (c*d) + e`` can not
   be transformed into ``(a*b) + ((c*d) + e)`` to create two fma operations.

.. _fastmath_afn:

``afn``
   Approximate functions - Allow substitution of approximate calculations for
   functions (sin, log, sqrt, etc). See floating-point intrinsic definitions
   for places where this can apply to LLVM's intrinsic math functions.

``reassoc``
   Allow reassociation transformations for floating-point instructions.
   This may dramatically change results in floating-point.

``fast``
   This flag implies all of the others.

.. _uselistorder:

Use-list Order Directives
-------------------------

Use-list directives encode the in-memory order of each use-list, allowing the
order to be recreated. ``<order-indexes>`` is a comma-separated list of
indexes that are assigned to the referenced value's uses. The referenced
value's use-list is immediately sorted by these indexes.

Use-list directives may appear at function scope or global scope. They are not
instructions, and have no effect on the semantics of the IR. When they're at
function scope, they must appear after the terminator of the final basic block.

If basic blocks have their address taken via ``blockaddress()`` expressions,
``uselistorder_bb`` can be used to reorder their use-lists from outside their
function's scope.

:Syntax:

::

    uselistorder <ty> <value>, { <order-indexes> }
    uselistorder_bb @function, %block { <order-indexes> }

:Examples:

::

    define void @foo(i32 %arg1, i32 %arg2) {
    entry:
      ; ... instructions ...
    bb:
      ; ... instructions ...

      ; At function scope.
      uselistorder i32 %arg1, { 1, 0, 2 }
      uselistorder label %bb, { 1, 0 }
    }

    ; At global scope.
    uselistorder ptr @global, { 1, 2, 0 }
    uselistorder i32 7, { 1, 0 }
    uselistorder i32 (i32) @bar, { 1, 0 }
    uselistorder_bb @foo, %bb, { 5, 1, 3, 2, 0, 4 }

.. _source_filename:

Source Filename
---------------

The *source filename* string is set to the original module identifier,
which will be the name of the compiled source file when compiling from
source through the clang front end, for example. It is then preserved through
the IR and bitcode.

This is currently necessary to generate a consistent unique global
identifier for local functions used in profile data, which prepends the
source file name to the local function name.

The syntax for the source file name is simply:

.. code-block:: text

    source_filename = "/path/to/source.c"

.. _typesystem:

Type System
===========

The LLVM type system is one of the most important features of the
intermediate representation. Being typed enables a number of
optimizations to be performed on the intermediate representation
directly, without having to do extra analyses on the side before the
transformation. A strong type system makes it easier to read the
generated code and enables novel analyses and transformations that are
not feasible to perform on normal three address code representations.

.. _t_void:

Void Type
---------

:Overview:


The void type does not represent any value and has no size.

:Syntax:


::

      void


.. _t_function:

Function Type
-------------

:Overview:


The function type can be thought of as a function signature. It consists of a
return type and a list of formal parameter types. The return type of a function
type is a void type or first class type --- except for :ref:`label <t_label>`
and :ref:`metadata <t_metadata>` types.

:Syntax:

::

      <returntype> (<parameter list>)

...where '``<parameter list>``' is a comma-separated list of type
specifiers. Optionally, the parameter list may include a type ``...``, which
indicates that the function takes a variable number of arguments. Variable
argument functions can access their arguments with the :ref:`variable argument
handling intrinsic <int_varargs>` functions. '``<returntype>``' is any type
except :ref:`label <t_label>` and :ref:`metadata <t_metadata>`.

:Examples:

+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``i32 (i32)``                   | function taking an ``i32``, returning an ``i32``                                                                                                                    |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``i32 (ptr, ...)``              | A vararg function that takes at least one :ref:`pointer <t_pointer>` argument and returns an integer. This is the signature for ``printf`` in LLVM.                 |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``{i32, i32} (i32)``            | A function taking an ``i32``, returning a :ref:`structure <t_struct>` containing two ``i32`` values                                                                 |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _t_firstclass:

First Class Types
-----------------

The :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` types are perhaps the most important.
Values of these types are the only ones which can be produced by
instructions.

.. _t_single_value:

Single Value Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These are the types that are valid in registers from CodeGen's perspective.

.. _t_integer:

Integer Type
""""""""""""

:Overview:

The integer type is a very simple type that simply specifies an
arbitrary bit width for the integer type desired. Any bit width from 1
bit to 2\ :sup:`23`\ (about 8 million) can be specified.

:Syntax:

::

      iN

The number of bits the integer will occupy is specified by the ``N``
value.

Examples:
*********

+----------------+------------------------------------------------+
| ``i1``         | a single-bit integer.                          |
+----------------+------------------------------------------------+
| ``i32``        | a 32-bit integer.                              |
+----------------+------------------------------------------------+
| ``i1942652``   | a really big integer of over 1 million bits.   |
+----------------+------------------------------------------------+

.. _t_floating:

Floating-Point Types
""""""""""""""""""""

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Description

   * - ``half``
     - 16-bit floating-point value

   * - ``bfloat``
     - 16-bit "brain" floating-point value (7-bit significand).  Provides the
       same number of exponent bits as ``float``, so that it matches its dynamic
       range, but with greatly reduced precision.  Used in Intel's AVX-512 BF16
       extensions and Arm's ARMv8.6-A extensions, among others.

   * - ``float``
     - 32-bit floating-point value

   * - ``double``
     - 64-bit floating-point value

   * - ``fp128``
     - 128-bit floating-point value (113-bit significand)

   * - ``x86_fp80``
     -  80-bit floating-point value (X87)

   * - ``ppc_fp128``
     - 128-bit floating-point value (two 64-bits)

The binary format of half, float, double, and fp128 correspond to the
IEEE-754-2008 specifications for binary16, binary32, binary64, and binary128
respectively.

X86_amx Type
""""""""""""

:Overview:

The x86_amx type represents a value held in an AMX tile register on an x86
machine. The operations allowed on it are quite limited. Only few intrinsics
are allowed: stride load and store, zero and dot product. No instruction is
allowed for this type. There are no arguments, arrays, pointers, vectors
or constants of this type.

:Syntax:

::

      x86_amx


X86_mmx Type
""""""""""""

:Overview:

The x86_mmx type represents a value held in an MMX register on an x86
machine. The operations allowed on it are quite limited: parameters and
return values, load and store, and bitcast. User-specified MMX
instructions are represented as intrinsic or asm calls with arguments
and/or results of this type. There are no arrays, vectors or constants
of this type.

:Syntax:

::

      x86_mmx


.. _t_pointer:

Pointer Type
""""""""""""

:Overview:

The pointer type ``ptr`` is used to specify memory locations. Pointers are
commonly used to reference objects in memory.

Pointer types may have an optional address space attribute defining
the numbered address space where the pointed-to object resides. For
example, ``ptr addrspace(5)`` is a pointer to address space 5.
In addition to integer constants, ``addrspace`` can also reference one of the
address spaces defined in the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>`.
``addrspace("A")`` will use the alloca address space, ``addrspace("G")``
the default globals address space and ``addrspace("P")`` the program address
space.

The default address space is number zero.

The semantics of non-zero address spaces are target-specific. Memory
access through a non-dereferenceable pointer is undefined behavior in
any address space. Pointers with the bit-value 0 are only assumed to
be non-dereferenceable in address space 0, unless the function is
marked with the ``null_pointer_is_valid`` attribute.

If an object can be proven accessible through a pointer with a
different address space, the access may be modified to use that
address space. Exceptions apply if the operation is ``volatile``.

Prior to LLVM 15, pointer types also specified a pointee type, such as
``i8*``, ``[4 x i32]*`` or ``i32 (i32*)*``. In LLVM 15, such "typed
pointers" are still supported under non-default options. See the
`opaque pointers document <OpaquePointers.html>`__ for more information.

.. _t_target_type:

Target Extension Type
"""""""""""""""""""""

:Overview:

Target extension types represent types that must be preserved through
optimization, but are otherwise generally opaque to the compiler. They may be
used as function parameters or arguments, and in :ref:`phi <i_phi>` or
:ref:`select <i_select>` instructions. Some types may be also used in
:ref:`alloca <i_alloca>` instructions or as global values, and correspondingly
it is legal to use :ref:`load <i_load>` and :ref:`store <i_store>` instructions
on them. Full semantics for these types are defined by the target.

The only constants that target extension types may have are ``zeroinitializer``,
``undef``, and ``poison``. Other possible values for target extension types may
arise from target-specific intrinsics and functions.

These types cannot be converted to other types. As such, it is not legal to use
them in :ref:`bitcast <i_bitcast>` instructions (as a source or target type),
nor is it legal to use them in :ref:`ptrtoint <i_ptrtoint>` or
:ref:`inttoptr <i_inttoptr>` instructions. Similarly, they are not legal to use
in an :ref:`icmp <i_icmp>` instruction.

Target extension types have a name and optional type or integer parameters. The
meanings of name and parameters are defined by the target. When being defined in
LLVM IR, all of the type parameters must precede all of the integer parameters.

Specific target extension types are registered with LLVM as having specific
properties. These properties can be used to restrict the type from appearing in
certain contexts, such as being the type of a global variable or having a
``zeroinitializer`` constant be valid. A complete list of type properties may be
found in the documentation for ``llvm::TargetExtType::Property`` (`doxygen
<https://llvm.org/doxygen/classllvm_1_1TargetExtType.html>`_).

:Syntax:

.. code-block:: llvm

      target("label")
      target("label", void)
      target("label", void, i32)
      target("label", 0, 1, 2)
      target("label", void, i32, 0, 1, 2)


.. _t_vector:

Vector Type
"""""""""""

:Overview:

A vector type is a simple derived type that represents a vector of
elements. Vector types are used when multiple primitive data are
operated in parallel using a single instruction (SIMD). A vector type
requires a size (number of elements), an underlying primitive data type,
and a scalable property to represent vectors where the exact hardware
vector length is unknown at compile time. Vector types are considered
:ref:`first class <t_firstclass>`.

:Memory Layout:

In general vector elements are laid out in memory in the same way as
:ref:`array types <t_array>`. Such an analogy works fine as long as the vector
elements are byte sized. However, when the elements of the vector aren't byte
sized it gets a bit more complicated. One way to describe the layout is by
describing what happens when a vector such as <N x iM> is bitcasted to an
integer type with N*M bits, and then following the rules for storing such an
integer to memory.

A bitcast from a vector type to a scalar integer type will see the elements
being packed together (without padding). The order in which elements are
inserted in the integer depends on endianness. For little endian element zero
is put in the least significant bits of the integer, and for big endian
element zero is put in the most significant bits.

Using a vector such as ``<i4 1, i4 2, i4 3, i4 5>`` as an example, together
with the analogy that we can replace a vector store by a bitcast followed by
an integer store, we get this for big endian:

.. code-block:: llvm

      %val = bitcast <4 x i4> <i4 1, i4 2, i4 3, i4 5> to i16

      ; Bitcasting from a vector to an integral type can be seen as
      ; concatenating the values:
      ;   %val now has the hexadecimal value 0x1235.

      store i16 %val, ptr %ptr

      ; In memory the content will be (8-bit addressing):
      ;
      ;    [%ptr + 0]: 00010010  (0x12)
      ;    [%ptr + 1]: 00110101  (0x35)

The same example for little endian:

.. code-block:: llvm

      %val = bitcast <4 x i4> <i4 1, i4 2, i4 3, i4 5> to i16

      ; Bitcasting from a vector to an integral type can be seen as
      ; concatenating the values:
      ;   %val now has the hexadecimal value 0x5321.

      store i16 %val, ptr %ptr

      ; In memory the content will be (8-bit addressing):
      ;
      ;    [%ptr + 0]: 00100001  (0x21)
      ;    [%ptr + 1]: 01010011  (0x53)

When ``<N*M>`` isn't evenly divisible by the byte size the exact memory layout
is unspecified (just like it is for an integral type of the same size). This
is because different targets could put the padding at different positions when
the type size is smaller than the type's store size.

:Syntax:

::

      < <# elements> x <elementtype> >          ; Fixed-length vector
      < vscale x <# elements> x <elementtype> > ; Scalable vector

The number of elements is a constant integer value larger than 0;
elementtype may be any integer, floating-point or pointer type. Vectors
of size zero are not allowed. For scalable vectors, the total number of
elements is a constant multiple (called vscale) of the specified number
of elements; vscale is a positive integer that is unknown at compile time
and the same hardware-dependent constant for all scalable vectors at run
time. The size of a specific scalable vector type is thus constant within
IR, even if the exact size in bytes cannot be determined until run time.

:Examples:

+------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| ``<4 x i32>``          | Vector of 4 32-bit integer values.                 |
+------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| ``<8 x float>``        | Vector of 8 32-bit floating-point values.          |
+------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| ``<2 x i64>``          | Vector of 2 64-bit integer values.                 |
+------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| ``<4 x ptr>``          | Vector of 4 pointers                               |
+------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| ``<vscale x 4 x i32>`` | Vector with a multiple of 4 32-bit integer values. |
+------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+

.. _t_label:

Label Type
^^^^^^^^^^

:Overview:

The label type represents code labels.

:Syntax:

::

      label

.. _t_token:

Token Type
^^^^^^^^^^

:Overview:

The token type is used when a value is associated with an instruction
but all uses of the value must not attempt to introspect or obscure it.
As such, it is not appropriate to have a :ref:`phi <i_phi>` or
:ref:`select <i_select>` of type token.

:Syntax:

::

      token



.. _t_metadata:

Metadata Type
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:Overview:

The metadata type represents embedded metadata. No derived types may be
created from metadata except for :ref:`function <t_function>` arguments.

:Syntax:

::

      metadata

.. _t_aggregate:

Aggregate Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Aggregate Types are a subset of derived types that can contain multiple
member types. :ref:`Arrays <t_array>` and :ref:`structs <t_struct>` are
aggregate types. :ref:`Vectors <t_vector>` are not considered to be
aggregate types.

.. _t_array:

Array Type
""""""""""

:Overview:

The array type is a very simple derived type that arranges elements
sequentially in memory. The array type requires a size (number of
elements) and an underlying data type.

:Syntax:

::

      [<# elements> x <elementtype>]

The number of elements is a constant integer value; ``elementtype`` may
be any type with a size.

:Examples:

+------------------+--------------------------------------+
| ``[40 x i32]``   | Array of 40 32-bit integer values.   |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+
| ``[41 x i32]``   | Array of 41 32-bit integer values.   |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+
| ``[4 x i8]``     | Array of 4 8-bit integer values.     |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+

Here are some examples of multidimensional arrays:

+-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``[3 x [4 x i32]]``         | 3x4 array of 32-bit integer values.                      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``[12 x [10 x float]]``     | 12x10 array of single precision floating-point values.   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``[2 x [3 x [4 x i16]]]``   | 2x3x4 array of 16-bit integer values.                    |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+

There is no restriction on indexing beyond the end of the array implied
by a static type (though there are restrictions on indexing beyond the
bounds of an allocated object in some cases). This means that
single-dimension 'variable sized array' addressing can be implemented in
LLVM with a zero length array type. An implementation of 'pascal style
arrays' in LLVM could use the type "``{ i32, [0 x float]}``", for
example.

.. _t_struct:

Structure Type
""""""""""""""

:Overview:

The structure type is used to represent a collection of data members
together in memory. The elements of a structure may be any type that has
a size.

Structures in memory are accessed using '``load``' and '``store``' by
getting a pointer to a field with the '``getelementptr``' instruction.
Structures in registers are accessed using the '``extractvalue``' and
'``insertvalue``' instructions.

Structures may optionally be "packed" structures, which indicate that
the alignment of the struct is one byte, and that there is no padding
between the elements. In non-packed structs, padding between field types
is inserted as defined by the DataLayout string in the module, which is
required to match what the underlying code generator expects.

Structures can either be "literal" or "identified". A literal structure
is defined inline with other types (e.g. ``[2 x {i32, i32}]``) whereas
identified types are always defined at the top level with a name.
Literal types are uniqued by their contents and can never be recursive
or opaque since there is no way to write one. Identified types can be
recursive, can be opaqued, and are never uniqued.

:Syntax:

::

      %T1 = type { <type list> }     ; Identified normal struct type
      %T2 = type <{ <type list> }>   ; Identified packed struct type

:Examples:

+------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``{ i32, i32, i32 }``        | A triple of three ``i32`` values                                                                                                                                                      |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``{ float, ptr }``           | A pair, where the first element is a ``float`` and the second element is a :ref:`pointer <t_pointer>`.                                                                                |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``<{ i8, i32 }>``            | A packed struct known to be 5 bytes in size.                                                                                                                                          |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _t_opaque:

Opaque Structure Types
""""""""""""""""""""""

:Overview:

Opaque structure types are used to represent structure types that
do not have a body specified. This corresponds (for example) to the C
notion of a forward declared structure. They can be named (``%X``) or
unnamed (``%52``).

:Syntax:

::

      %X = type opaque
      %52 = type opaque

:Examples:

+--------------+-------------------+
| ``opaque``   | An opaque type.   |
+--------------+-------------------+

.. _constants:

Constants
=========

LLVM has several different basic types of constants. This section
describes them all and their syntax.

Simple Constants
----------------

**Boolean constants**
    The two strings '``true``' and '``false``' are both valid constants
    of the ``i1`` type.
**Integer constants**
    Standard integers (such as '4') are constants of the :ref:`integer
    <t_integer>` type. They can be either decimal or
    hexadecimal. Decimal integers can be prefixed with - to represent
    negative integers, e.g. '``-1234``'. Hexadecimal integers must be
    prefixed with either u or s to indicate whether they are unsigned
    or signed respectively. e.g '``u0x8000``' gives 32768, whilst
    '``s0x8000``' gives -32768.

    Note that hexadecimal integers are sign extended from the number
    of active bits, i.e. the bit width minus the number of leading
    zeros. So '``s0x0001``' of type '``i16``' will be -1, not 1.
**Floating-point constants**
    Floating-point constants use standard decimal notation (e.g.
    123.421), exponential notation (e.g. 1.23421e+2), or a more precise
    hexadecimal notation (see below). The assembler requires the exact
    decimal value of a floating-point constant. For example, the
    assembler accepts 1.25 but rejects 1.3 because 1.3 is a repeating
    decimal in binary. Floating-point constants must have a
    :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type.
**Null pointer constants**
    The identifier '``null``' is recognized as a null pointer constant
    and must be of :ref:`pointer type <t_pointer>`.
**Token constants**
    The identifier '``none``' is recognized as an empty token constant
    and must be of :ref:`token type <t_token>`.

The one non-intuitive notation for constants is the hexadecimal form of
floating-point constants. For example, the form
'``double    0x432ff973cafa8000``' is equivalent to (but harder to read
than) '``double 4.5e+15``'. The only time hexadecimal floating-point
constants are required (and the only time that they are generated by the
disassembler) is when a floating-point constant must be emitted but it
cannot be represented as a decimal floating-point number in a reasonable
number of digits. For example, NaN's, infinities, and other special
values are represented in their IEEE hexadecimal format so that assembly
and disassembly do not cause any bits to change in the constants.

When using the hexadecimal form, constants of types bfloat, half, float, and
double are represented using the 16-digit form shown above (which matches the
IEEE754 representation for double); bfloat, half and float values must, however,
be exactly representable as bfloat, IEEE 754 half, and IEEE 754 single
precision respectively. Hexadecimal format is always used for long double, and
there are three forms of long double. The 80-bit format used by x86 is
represented as ``0xK`` followed by 20 hexadecimal digits. The 128-bit format
used by PowerPC (two adjacent doubles) is represented by ``0xM`` followed by 32
hexadecimal digits. The IEEE 128-bit format is represented by ``0xL`` followed
by 32 hexadecimal digits. Long doubles will only work if they match the long
double format on your target.  The IEEE 16-bit format (half precision) is
represented by ``0xH`` followed by 4 hexadecimal digits. The bfloat 16-bit
format is represented by ``0xR`` followed by 4 hexadecimal digits. All
hexadecimal formats are big-endian (sign bit at the left).

There are no constants of type x86_mmx and x86_amx.

.. _complexconstants:

Complex Constants
-----------------

Complex constants are a (potentially recursive) combination of simple
constants and smaller complex constants.

**Structure constants**
    Structure constants are represented with notation similar to
    structure type definitions (a comma separated list of elements,
    surrounded by braces (``{}``)). For example:
    "``{ i32 4, float 17.0, ptr @G }``", where "``@G``" is declared as
    "``@G = external global i32``". Structure constants must have
    :ref:`structure type <t_struct>`, and the number and types of elements
    must match those specified by the type.
**Array constants**
    Array constants are represented with notation similar to array type
    definitions (a comma separated list of elements, surrounded by
    square brackets (``[]``)). For example:
    "``[ i32 42, i32 11, i32 74 ]``". Array constants must have
    :ref:`array type <t_array>`, and the number and types of elements must
    match those specified by the type. As a special case, character array
    constants may also be represented as a double-quoted string using the ``c``
    prefix. For example: "``c"Hello World\0A\00"``".
**Vector constants**
    Vector constants are represented with notation similar to vector
    type definitions (a comma separated list of elements, surrounded by
    less-than/greater-than's (``<>``)). For example:
    "``< i32 42, i32 11, i32 74, i32 100 >``". Vector constants
    must have :ref:`vector type <t_vector>`, and the number and types of
    elements must match those specified by the type.

    When creating a vector whose elements have the same constant value, the
    preferred syntax is ``splat (<Ty> Val)``. For example: "``splat (i32 11)``".
    These vector constants must have :ref:`vector type <t_vector>` with an
    element type that matches the ``splat`` operand.
**Zero initialization**
    The string '``zeroinitializer``' can be used to zero initialize a
    value to zero of *any* type, including scalar and
    :ref:`aggregate <t_aggregate>` types. This is often used to avoid
    having to print large zero initializers (e.g. for large arrays) and
    is always exactly equivalent to using explicit zero initializers.
**Metadata node**
    A metadata node is a constant tuple without types. For example:
    "``!{!0, !{!2, !0}, !"test"}``". Metadata can reference constant values,
    for example: "``!{!0, i32 0, ptr @global, ptr @function, !"str"}``".
    Unlike other typed constants that are meant to be interpreted as part of
    the instruction stream, metadata is a place to attach additional
    information such as debug info.

Global Variable and Function Addresses
--------------------------------------

The addresses of :ref:`global variables <globalvars>` and
:ref:`functions <functionstructure>` are always implicitly valid
(link-time) constants. These constants are explicitly referenced when
the :ref:`identifier for the global <identifiers>` is used and always have
:ref:`pointer <t_pointer>` type. For example, the following is a legal LLVM
file:

.. code-block:: llvm

    @X = global i32 17
    @Y = global i32 42
    @Z = global [2 x ptr] [ ptr @X, ptr @Y ]

.. _undefvalues:

Undefined Values
----------------

The string '``undef``' can be used anywhere a constant is expected, and
indicates that the user of the value may receive an unspecified
bit-pattern. Undefined values may be of any type (other than '``label``'
or '``void``') and be used anywhere a constant is permitted.

.. note::

  A '``poison``' value (described in the next section) should be used instead of
  '``undef``' whenever possible. Poison values are stronger than undef, and
  enable more optimizations. Just the existence of '``undef``' blocks certain
  optimizations (see the examples below).

Undefined values are useful because they indicate to the compiler that
the program is well defined no matter what value is used. This gives the
compiler more freedom to optimize. Here are some examples of
(potentially surprising) transformations that are valid (in pseudo IR):

.. code-block:: llvm

      %A = add %X, undef
      %B = sub %X, undef
      %C = xor %X, undef
    Safe:
      %A = undef
      %B = undef
      %C = undef

This is safe because all of the output bits are affected by the undef
bits. Any output bit can have a zero or one depending on the input bits.

.. code-block:: llvm

      %A = or %X, undef
      %B = and %X, undef
    Safe:
      %A = -1
      %B = 0
    Safe:
      %A = %X  ;; By choosing undef as 0
      %B = %X  ;; By choosing undef as -1
    Unsafe:
      %A = undef
      %B = undef

These logical operations have bits that are not always affected by the
input. For example, if ``%X`` has a zero bit, then the output of the
'``and``' operation will always be a zero for that bit, no matter what
the corresponding bit from the '``undef``' is. As such, it is unsafe to
optimize or assume that the result of the '``and``' is '``undef``'.
However, it is safe to assume that all bits of the '``undef``' could be
0, and optimize the '``and``' to 0. Likewise, it is safe to assume that
all the bits of the '``undef``' operand to the '``or``' could be set,
allowing the '``or``' to be folded to -1.

.. code-block:: llvm

      %A = select undef, %X, %Y
      %B = select undef, 42, %Y
      %C = select %X, %Y, undef
    Safe:
      %A = %X     (or %Y)
      %B = 42     (or %Y)
      %C = %Y     (if %Y is provably not poison; unsafe otherwise)
    Unsafe:
      %A = undef
      %B = undef
      %C = undef

This set of examples shows that undefined '``select``' (and conditional
branch) conditions can go *either way*, but they have to come from one
of the two operands. In the ``%A`` example, if ``%X`` and ``%Y`` were
both known to have a clear low bit, then ``%A`` would have to have a
cleared low bit. However, in the ``%C`` example, the optimizer is
allowed to assume that the '``undef``' operand could be the same as
``%Y`` if ``%Y`` is provably not '``poison``', allowing the whole '``select``'
to be eliminated. This is because '``poison``' is stronger than '``undef``'.

.. code-block:: llvm

      %A = xor undef, undef

      %B = undef
      %C = xor %B, %B

      %D = undef
      %E = icmp slt %D, 4
      %F = icmp gte %D, 4

    Safe:
      %A = undef
      %B = undef
      %C = undef
      %D = undef
      %E = undef
      %F = undef

This example points out that two '``undef``' operands are not
necessarily the same. This can be surprising to people (and also matches
C semantics) where they assume that "``X^X``" is always zero, even if
``X`` is undefined. This isn't true for a number of reasons, but the
short answer is that an '``undef``' "variable" can arbitrarily change
its value over its "live range". This is true because the variable
doesn't actually *have a live range*. Instead, the value is logically
read from arbitrary registers that happen to be around when needed, so
the value is not necessarily consistent over time. In fact, ``%A`` and
``%C`` need to have the same semantics or the core LLVM "replace all
uses with" concept would not hold.

To ensure all uses of a given register observe the same value (even if
'``undef``'), the :ref:`freeze instruction <i_freeze>` can be used.

.. code-block:: llvm

      %A = sdiv undef, %X
      %B = sdiv %X, undef
    Safe:
      %A = 0
    b: unreachable

These examples show the crucial difference between an *undefined value*
and *undefined behavior*. An undefined value (like '``undef``') is
allowed to have an arbitrary bit-pattern. This means that the ``%A``
operation can be constant folded to '``0``', because the '``undef``'
could be zero, and zero divided by any value is zero.
However, in the second example, we can make a more aggressive
assumption: because the ``undef`` is allowed to be an arbitrary value,
we are allowed to assume that it could be zero. Since a divide by zero
has *undefined behavior*, we are allowed to assume that the operation
does not execute at all. This allows us to delete the divide and all
code after it. Because the undefined operation "can't happen", the
optimizer can assume that it occurs in dead code.

.. code-block:: text

    a:  store undef -> %X
    b:  store %X -> undef
    Safe:
    a: <deleted>     (if the stored value in %X is provably not poison)
    b: unreachable

A store *of* an undefined value can be assumed to not have any effect;
we can assume that the value is overwritten with bits that happen to
match what was already there. This argument is only valid if the stored value
is provably not ``poison``. However, a store *to* an undefined
location could clobber arbitrary memory, therefore, it has undefined
behavior.

Branching on an undefined value is undefined behavior.
This explains optimizations that depend on branch conditions to construct
predicates, such as Correlated Value Propagation and Global Value Numbering.
In case of switch instruction, the branch condition should be frozen, otherwise
it is undefined behavior.

.. code-block:: llvm

    Unsafe:
      br undef, BB1, BB2 ; UB

      %X = and i32 undef, 255
      switch %X, label %ret [ .. ] ; UB

      store undef, ptr %ptr
      %X = load ptr %ptr ; %X is undef
      switch i8 %X, label %ret [ .. ] ; UB

    Safe:
      %X = or i8 undef, 255 ; always 255
      switch i8 %X, label %ret [ .. ] ; Well-defined

      %X = freeze i1 undef
      br %X, BB1, BB2 ; Well-defined (non-deterministic jump)



.. _poisonvalues:

Poison Values
-------------

A poison value is a result of an erroneous operation.
In order to facilitate speculative execution, many instructions do not
invoke immediate undefined behavior when provided with illegal operands,
and return a poison value instead.
The string '``poison``' can be used anywhere a constant is expected, and
operations such as :ref:`add <i_add>` with the ``nsw`` flag can produce
a poison value.

Most instructions return '``poison``' when one of their arguments is
'``poison``'. A notable exception is the :ref:`select instruction <i_select>`.
Propagation of poison can be stopped with the
:ref:`freeze instruction <i_freeze>`.

It is correct to replace a poison value with an
:ref:`undef value <undefvalues>` or any value of the type.

This means that immediate undefined behavior occurs if a poison value is
used as an instruction operand that has any values that trigger undefined
behavior. Notably this includes (but is not limited to):

-  The pointer operand of a :ref:`load <i_load>`, :ref:`store <i_store>` or
   any other pointer dereferencing instruction (independent of address
   space).
-  The divisor operand of a ``udiv``, ``sdiv``, ``urem`` or ``srem``
   instruction.
-  The condition operand of a :ref:`br <i_br>` instruction.
-  The callee operand of a :ref:`call <i_call>` or :ref:`invoke <i_invoke>`
   instruction.
-  The parameter operand of a :ref:`call <i_call>` or :ref:`invoke <i_invoke>`
   instruction, when the function or invoking call site has a ``noundef``
   attribute in the corresponding position.
-  The operand of a :ref:`ret <i_ret>` instruction if the function or invoking
   call site has a `noundef` attribute in the return value position.

Here are some examples:

.. code-block:: llvm

    entry:
      %poison = sub nuw i32 0, 1           ; Results in a poison value.
      %poison2 = sub i32 poison, 1         ; Also results in a poison value.
      %still_poison = and i32 %poison, 0   ; 0, but also poison.
      %poison_yet_again = getelementptr i32, ptr @h, i32 %still_poison
      store i32 0, ptr %poison_yet_again   ; Undefined behavior due to
                                           ; store to poison.

      store i32 %poison, ptr @g            ; Poison value stored to memory.
      %poison3 = load i32, ptr @g          ; Poison value loaded back from memory.

      %poison4 = load i16, ptr @g          ; Returns a poison value.
      %poison5 = load i64, ptr @g          ; Returns a poison value.

      %cmp = icmp slt i32 %poison, 0       ; Returns a poison value.
      br i1 %cmp, label %end, label %end   ; undefined behavior

    end:

.. _welldefinedvalues:

Well-Defined Values
-------------------

Given a program execution, a value is *well defined* if the value does not
have an undef bit and is not poison in the execution.
An aggregate value or vector is well defined if its elements are well defined.
The padding of an aggregate isn't considered, since it isn't visible
without storing it into memory and loading it with a different type.

A constant of a :ref:`single value <t_single_value>`, non-vector type is well
defined if it is neither '``undef``' constant nor '``poison``' constant.
The result of :ref:`freeze instruction <i_freeze>` is well defined regardless
of its operand.

.. _blockaddress:

Addresses of Basic Blocks
-------------------------

``blockaddress(@function, %block)``

The '``blockaddress``' constant computes the address of the specified
basic block in the specified function.

It always has an ``ptr addrspace(P)`` type, where ``P`` is the address space
of the function containing ``%block`` (usually ``addrspace(0)``).

Taking the address of the entry block is illegal.

This value only has defined behavior when used as an operand to the
':ref:`indirectbr <i_indirectbr>`' or for comparisons against null. Pointer
equality tests between labels addresses results in undefined behavior ---
though, again, comparison against null is ok, and no label is equal to the null
pointer. This may be passed around as an opaque pointer sized value as long as
the bits are not inspected. This allows ``ptrtoint`` and arithmetic to be
performed on these values so long as the original value is reconstituted before
the ``indirectbr`` instruction.

Finally, some targets may provide defined semantics when using the value
as the operand to an inline assembly, but that is target specific.

.. _dso_local_equivalent:

DSO Local Equivalent
--------------------

``dso_local_equivalent @func``

A '``dso_local_equivalent``' constant represents a function which is
functionally equivalent to a given function, but is always defined in the
current linkage unit. The resulting pointer has the same type as the underlying
function. The resulting pointer is permitted, but not required, to be different
from a pointer to the function, and it may have different values in different
translation units.

The target function may not have ``extern_weak`` linkage.

``dso_local_equivalent`` can be implemented as such:

- If the function has local linkage, hidden visibility, or is
  ``dso_local``, ``dso_local_equivalent`` can be implemented as simply a pointer
  to the function.
- ``dso_local_equivalent`` can be implemented with a stub that tail-calls the
  function. Many targets support relocations that resolve at link time to either
  a function or a stub for it, depending on if the function is defined within the
  linkage unit; LLVM will use this when available. (This is commonly called a
  "PLT stub".) On other targets, the stub may need to be emitted explicitly.

This can be used wherever a ``dso_local`` instance of a function is needed without
needing to explicitly make the original function ``dso_local``. An instance where
this can be used is for static offset calculations between a function and some other
``dso_local`` symbol. This is especially useful for the Relative VTables C++ ABI,
where dynamic relocations for function pointers in VTables can be replaced with
static relocations for offsets between the VTable and virtual functions which
may not be ``dso_local``.

This is currently only supported for ELF binary formats.

.. _no_cfi:

No CFI
------

``no_cfi @func``

With `Control-Flow Integrity (CFI)
<https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ControlFlowIntegrity.html>`_, a '``no_cfi``'
constant represents a function reference that does not get replaced with a
reference to the CFI jump table in the ``LowerTypeTests`` pass. These constants
may be useful in low-level programs, such as operating system kernels, which
need to refer to the actual function body.

.. _ptrauth_constant:

Pointer Authentication Constants
--------------------------------

``ptrauth (ptr CST, i32 KEY[, i64 DISC[, ptr ADDRDISC]?]?)``

A '``ptrauth``' constant represents a pointer with a cryptographic
authentication signature embedded into some bits, as described in the
`Pointer Authentication <PointerAuth.html>`__ document.

A '``ptrauth``' constant is simply a constant equivalent to the
``llvm.ptrauth.sign`` intrinsic, potentially fed by a discriminator
``llvm.ptrauth.blend`` if needed.

Its type is the same as the first argument.  An integer constant discriminator
and an address discriminator may be optionally specified.  Otherwise, they have
values ``i64 0`` and ``ptr null``.

If the address discriminator is ``null`` then the expression is equivalent to

.. code-block:: llvm

    %tmp = call i64 @llvm.ptrauth.sign(i64 ptrtoint (ptr CST to i64), i32 KEY, i64 DISC)
    %val = inttoptr i64 %tmp to ptr

Otherwise, the expression is equivalent to:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %tmp1 = call i64 @llvm.ptrauth.blend(i64 ptrtoint (ptr ADDRDISC to i64), i64 DISC)
    %tmp2 = call i64 @llvm.ptrauth.sign(i64 ptrtoint (ptr CST to i64), i32 KEY, i64 %tmp1)
    %val = inttoptr i64 %tmp2 to ptr

.. _constantexprs:

Constant Expressions
--------------------

Constant expressions are used to allow expressions involving other
constants to be used as constants. Constant expressions may be of any
:ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type and may involve any LLVM operation
that does not have side effects (e.g. load and call are not supported).
The following is the syntax for constant expressions:

``trunc (CST to TYPE)``
    Perform the :ref:`trunc operation <i_trunc>` on constants.
``ptrtoint (CST to TYPE)``
    Perform the :ref:`ptrtoint operation <i_ptrtoint>` on constants.
``inttoptr (CST to TYPE)``
    Perform the :ref:`inttoptr operation <i_inttoptr>` on constants.
    This one is *really* dangerous!
``bitcast (CST to TYPE)``
    Convert a constant, CST, to another TYPE.
    The constraints of the operands are the same as those for the
    :ref:`bitcast instruction <i_bitcast>`.
``addrspacecast (CST to TYPE)``
    Convert a constant pointer or constant vector of pointer, CST, to another
    TYPE in a different address space. The constraints of the operands are the
    same as those for the :ref:`addrspacecast instruction <i_addrspacecast>`.
``getelementptr (TY, CSTPTR, IDX0, IDX1, ...)``, ``getelementptr inbounds (TY, CSTPTR, IDX0, IDX1, ...)``
    Perform the :ref:`getelementptr operation <i_getelementptr>` on
    constants. As with the :ref:`getelementptr <i_getelementptr>`
    instruction, the index list may have one or more indexes, which are
    required to make sense for the type of "pointer to TY". These indexes
    may be implicitly sign-extended or truncated to match the index size
    of CSTPTR's address space.
``extractelement (VAL, IDX)``
    Perform the :ref:`extractelement operation <i_extractelement>` on
    constants.
``insertelement (VAL, ELT, IDX)``
    Perform the :ref:`insertelement operation <i_insertelement>` on
    constants.
``shufflevector (VEC1, VEC2, IDXMASK)``
    Perform the :ref:`shufflevector operation <i_shufflevector>` on
    constants.
``add (LHS, RHS)``
    Perform an addition on constants.
``sub (LHS, RHS)``
    Perform a subtraction on constants.
``mul (LHS, RHS)``
    Perform a multiplication on constants.
``shl (LHS, RHS)``
    Perform a left shift on constants.
``xor (LHS, RHS)``
    Perform a bitwise xor on constants.

Other Values
============

.. _inlineasmexprs:

Inline Assembler Expressions
----------------------------

LLVM supports inline assembler expressions (as opposed to :ref:`Module-Level
Inline Assembly <moduleasm>`) through the use of a special value. This value
represents the inline assembler as a template string (containing the
instructions to emit), a list of operand constraints (stored as a string), a
flag that indicates whether or not the inline asm expression has side effects,
and a flag indicating whether the function containing the asm needs to align its
stack conservatively.

The template string supports argument substitution of the operands using "``$``"
followed by a number, to indicate substitution of the given register/memory
location, as specified by the constraint string. "``${NUM:MODIFIER}``" may also
be used, where ``MODIFIER`` is a target-specific annotation for how to print the
operand (See :ref:`inline-asm-modifiers`).

A literal "``$``" may be included by using "``$$``" in the template. To include
other special characters into the output, the usual "``\XX``" escapes may be
used, just as in other strings. Note that after template substitution, the
resulting assembly string is parsed by LLVM's integrated assembler unless it is
disabled -- even when emitting a ``.s`` file -- and thus must contain assembly
syntax known to LLVM.

LLVM also supports a few more substitutions useful for writing inline assembly:

- ``${:uid}``: Expands to a decimal integer unique to this inline assembly blob.
  This substitution is useful when declaring a local label. Many standard
  compiler optimizations, such as inlining, may duplicate an inline asm blob.
  Adding a blob-unique identifier ensures that the two labels will not conflict
  during assembly. This is used to implement `GCC's %= special format
  string <https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Extended-Asm.html>`_.
- ``${:comment}``: Expands to the comment character of the current target's
  assembly dialect. This is usually ``#``, but many targets use other strings,
  such as ``;``, ``//``, or ``!``.
- ``${:private}``: Expands to the assembler private label prefix. Labels with
  this prefix will not appear in the symbol table of the assembled object.
  Typically the prefix is ``L``, but targets may use other strings. ``.L`` is
  relatively popular.

LLVM's support for inline asm is modeled closely on the requirements of Clang's
GCC-compatible inline-asm support. Thus, the feature-set and the constraint and
modifier codes listed here are similar or identical to those in GCC's inline asm
support. However, to be clear, the syntax of the template and constraint strings
described here is *not* the same as the syntax accepted by GCC and Clang, and,
while most constraint letters are passed through as-is by Clang, some get
translated to other codes when converting from the C source to the LLVM
assembly.

An example inline assembler expression is:

.. code-block:: llvm

    i32 (i32) asm "bswap $0", "=r,r"

Inline assembler expressions may **only** be used as the callee operand
of a :ref:`call <i_call>` or an :ref:`invoke <i_invoke>` instruction.
Thus, typically we have:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %X = call i32 asm "bswap $0", "=r,r"(i32 %Y)

Inline asms with side effects not visible in the constraint list must be
marked as having side effects. This is done through the use of the
'``sideeffect``' keyword, like so:

.. code-block:: llvm

    call void asm sideeffect "eieio", ""()

In some cases inline asms will contain code that will not work unless
the stack is aligned in some way, such as calls or SSE instructions on
x86, yet will not contain code that does that alignment within the asm.
The compiler should make conservative assumptions about what the asm
might contain and should generate its usual stack alignment code in the
prologue if the '``alignstack``' keyword is present:

.. code-block:: llvm

    call void asm alignstack "eieio", ""()

Inline asms also support using non-standard assembly dialects. The
assumed dialect is ATT. When the '``inteldialect``' keyword is present,
the inline asm is using the Intel dialect. Currently, ATT and Intel are
the only supported dialects. An example is:

.. code-block:: llvm

    call void asm inteldialect "eieio", ""()

In the case that the inline asm might unwind the stack,
the '``unwind``' keyword must be used, so that the compiler emits
unwinding information:

.. code-block:: llvm

    call void asm unwind "call func", ""()

If the inline asm unwinds the stack and isn't marked with
the '``unwind``' keyword, the behavior is undefined.

If multiple keywords appear, the '``sideeffect``' keyword must come
first, the '``alignstack``' keyword second, the '``inteldialect``' keyword
third and the '``unwind``' keyword last.

Inline Asm Constraint String
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The constraint list is a comma-separated string, each element containing one or
more constraint codes.

For each element in the constraint list an appropriate register or memory
operand will be chosen, and it will be made available to assembly template
string expansion as ``$0`` for the first constraint in the list, ``$1`` for the
second, etc.

There are three different types of constraints, which are distinguished by a
prefix symbol in front of the constraint code: Output, Input, and Clobber. The
constraints must always be given in that order: outputs first, then inputs, then
clobbers. They cannot be intermingled.

There are also three different categories of constraint codes:

- Register constraint. This is either a register class, or a fixed physical
  register. This kind of constraint will allocate a register, and if necessary,
  bitcast the argument or result to the appropriate type.
- Memory constraint. This kind of constraint is for use with an instruction
  taking a memory operand. Different constraints allow for different addressing
  modes used by the target.
- Immediate value constraint. This kind of constraint is for an integer or other
  immediate value which can be rendered directly into an instruction. The
  various target-specific constraints allow the selection of a value in the
  proper range for the instruction you wish to use it with.

Output constraints
""""""""""""""""""

Output constraints are specified by an "``=``" prefix (e.g. "``=r``"). This
indicates that the assembly will write to this operand, and the operand will
then be made available as a return value of the ``asm`` expression. Output
constraints do not consume an argument from the call instruction. (Except, see
below about indirect outputs).

Normally, it is expected that no output locations are written to by the assembly
expression until *all* of the inputs have been read. As such, LLVM may assign
the same register to an output and an input. If this is not safe (e.g. if the
assembly contains two instructions, where the first writes to one output, and
the second reads an input and writes to a second output), then the "``&``"
modifier must be used (e.g. "``=&r``") to specify that the output is an
"early-clobber" output. Marking an output as "early-clobber" ensures that LLVM
will not use the same register for any inputs (other than an input tied to this
output).

Input constraints
"""""""""""""""""

Input constraints do not have a prefix -- just the constraint codes. Each input
constraint will consume one argument from the call instruction. It is not
permitted for the asm to write to any input register or memory location (unless
that input is tied to an output). Note also that multiple inputs may all be
assigned to the same register, if LLVM can determine that they necessarily all
contain the same value.

Instead of providing a Constraint Code, input constraints may also "tie"
themselves to an output constraint, by providing an integer as the constraint
string. Tied inputs still consume an argument from the call instruction, and
take up a position in the asm template numbering as is usual -- they will simply
be constrained to always use the same register as the output they've been tied
to. For example, a constraint string of "``=r,0``" says to assign a register for
output, and use that register as an input as well (it being the 0'th
constraint).

It is permitted to tie an input to an "early-clobber" output. In that case, no
*other* input may share the same register as the input tied to the early-clobber
(even when the other input has the same value).

You may only tie an input to an output which has a register constraint, not a
memory constraint. Only a single input may be tied to an output.

There is also an "interesting" feature which deserves a bit of explanation: if a
register class constraint allocates a register which is too small for the value
type operand provided as input, the input value will be split into multiple
registers, and all of them passed to the inline asm.

However, this feature is often not as useful as you might think.

Firstly, the registers are *not* guaranteed to be consecutive. So, on those
architectures that have instructions which operate on multiple consecutive
instructions, this is not an appropriate way to support them. (e.g. the 32-bit
SparcV8 has a 64-bit load, which instruction takes a single 32-bit register. The
hardware then loads into both the named register, and the next register. This
feature of inline asm would not be useful to support that.)

A few of the targets provide a template string modifier allowing explicit access
to the second register of a two-register operand (e.g. MIPS ``L``, ``M``, and
``D``). On such an architecture, you can actually access the second allocated
register (yet, still, not any subsequent ones). But, in that case, you're still
probably better off simply splitting the value into two separate operands, for
clarity. (e.g. see the description of the ``A`` constraint on X86, which,
despite existing only for use with this feature, is not really a good idea to
use)

Indirect inputs and outputs
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Indirect output or input constraints can be specified by the "``*``" modifier
(which goes after the "``=``" in case of an output). This indicates that the asm
will write to or read from the contents of an *address* provided as an input
argument. (Note that in this way, indirect outputs act more like an *input* than
an output: just like an input, they consume an argument of the call expression,
rather than producing a return value. An indirect output constraint is an
"output" only in that the asm is expected to write to the contents of the input
memory location, instead of just read from it).

This is most typically used for memory constraint, e.g. "``=*m``", to pass the
address of a variable as a value.

It is also possible to use an indirect *register* constraint, but only on output
(e.g. "``=*r``"). This will cause LLVM to allocate a register for an output
value normally, and then, separately emit a store to the address provided as
input, after the provided inline asm. (It's not clear what value this
functionality provides, compared to writing the store explicitly after the asm
statement, and it can only produce worse code, since it bypasses many
optimization passes. I would recommend not using it.)

Call arguments for indirect constraints must have pointer type and must specify
the :ref:`elementtype <attr_elementtype>` attribute to indicate the pointer
element type.

Clobber constraints
"""""""""""""""""""

A clobber constraint is indicated by a "``~``" prefix. A clobber does not
consume an input operand, nor generate an output. Clobbers cannot use any of the
general constraint code letters -- they may use only explicit register
constraints, e.g. "``~{eax}``". The one exception is that a clobber string of
"``~{memory}``" indicates that the assembly writes to arbitrary undeclared
memory locations -- not only the memory pointed to by a declared indirect
output.

Note that clobbering named registers that are also present in output
constraints is not legal.

Label constraints
"""""""""""""""""

A label constraint is indicated by a "``!``" prefix and typically used in the
form ``"!i"``. Instead of consuming call arguments, label constraints consume
indirect destination labels of ``callbr`` instructions.

Label constraints can only be used in conjunction with ``callbr`` and the
number of label constraints must match the number of indirect destination
labels in the ``callbr`` instruction.


Constraint Codes
""""""""""""""""
After a potential prefix comes constraint code, or codes.

A Constraint Code is either a single letter (e.g. "``r``"), a "``^``" character
followed by two letters (e.g. "``^wc``"), or "``{``" register-name "``}``"
(e.g. "``{eax}``").

The one and two letter constraint codes are typically chosen to be the same as
GCC's constraint codes.

A single constraint may include one or more than constraint code in it, leaving
it up to LLVM to choose which one to use. This is included mainly for
compatibility with the translation of GCC inline asm coming from clang.

There are two ways to specify alternatives, and either or both may be used in an
inline asm constraint list:

1) Append the codes to each other, making a constraint code set. E.g. "``im``"
   or "``{eax}m``". This means "choose any of the options in the set". The
   choice of constraint is made independently for each constraint in the
   constraint list.

2) Use "``|``" between constraint code sets, creating alternatives. Every
   constraint in the constraint list must have the same number of alternative
   sets. With this syntax, the same alternative in *all* of the items in the
   constraint list will be chosen together.

Putting those together, you might have a two operand constraint string like
``"rm|r,ri|rm"``. This indicates that if operand 0 is ``r`` or ``m``, then
operand 1 may be one of ``r`` or ``i``. If operand 0 is ``r``, then operand 1
may be one of ``r`` or ``m``. But, operand 0 and 1 cannot both be of type m.

However, the use of either of the alternatives features is *NOT* recommended, as
LLVM is not able to make an intelligent choice about which one to use. (At the
point it currently needs to choose, not enough information is available to do so
in a smart way.) Thus, it simply tries to make a choice that's most likely to
compile, not one that will be optimal performance. (e.g., given "``rm``", it'll
always choose to use memory, not registers). And, if given multiple registers,
or multiple register classes, it will simply choose the first one. (In fact, it
doesn't currently even ensure explicitly specified physical registers are
unique, so specifying multiple physical registers as alternatives, like
``{r11}{r12},{r11}{r12}``, will assign r11 to both operands, not at all what was
intended.)

Supported Constraint Code List
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The constraint codes are, in general, expected to behave the same way they do in
GCC. LLVM's support is often implemented on an 'as-needed' basis, to support C
inline asm code which was supported by GCC. A mismatch in behavior between LLVM
and GCC likely indicates a bug in LLVM.

Some constraint codes are typically supported by all targets:

- ``r``: A register in the target's general purpose register class.
- ``m``: A memory address operand. It is target-specific what addressing modes
  are supported, typical examples are register, or register + register offset,
  or register + immediate offset (of some target-specific size).
- ``p``: An address operand. Similar to ``m``, but used by "load address"
  type instructions without touching memory.
- ``i``: An integer constant (of target-specific width). Allows either a simple
  immediate, or a relocatable value.
- ``n``: An integer constant -- *not* including relocatable values.
- ``s``: A symbol or label reference with a constant offset.
- ``X``: Allows an operand of any kind, no constraint whatsoever. Typically
  useful to pass a label for an asm branch or call.

  .. FIXME: but that surely isn't actually okay to jump out of an asm
     block without telling llvm about the control transfer???)

- ``{register-name}``: Requires exactly the named physical register.

Other constraints are target-specific:

AArch64:

- ``z``: An immediate integer 0. Outputs ``WZR`` or ``XZR``, as appropriate.
- ``I``: An immediate integer valid for an ``ADD`` or ``SUB`` instruction,
  i.e. 0 to 4095 with optional shift by 12.
- ``J``: An immediate integer that, when negated, is valid for an ``ADD`` or
  ``SUB`` instruction, i.e. -1 to -4095 with optional left shift by 12.
- ``K``: An immediate integer that is valid for the 'bitmask immediate 32' of a
  logical instruction like ``AND``, ``EOR``, or ``ORR`` with a 32-bit register.
- ``L``: An immediate integer that is valid for the 'bitmask immediate 64' of a
  logical instruction like ``AND``, ``EOR``, or ``ORR`` with a 64-bit register.
- ``M``: An immediate integer for use with the ``MOV`` assembly alias on a
  32-bit register. This is a superset of ``K``: in addition to the bitmask
  immediate, also allows immediate integers which can be loaded with a single
  ``MOVZ`` or ``MOVL`` instruction.
- ``N``: An immediate integer for use with the ``MOV`` assembly alias on a
  64-bit register. This is a superset of ``L``.
- ``Q``: Memory address operand must be in a single register (no
  offsets). (However, LLVM currently does this for the ``m`` constraint as
  well.)
- ``r``: A 32 or 64-bit integer register (W* or X*).
- ``S``: A symbol or label reference with a constant offset. The generic ``s``
  is not supported.
- ``Uci``: Like r, but restricted to registers 8 to 11 inclusive.
- ``Ucj``: Like r, but restricted to registers 12 to 15 inclusive.
- ``w``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point, SIMD or SVE vector register.
- ``x``: Like w, but restricted to registers 0 to 15 inclusive.
- ``y``: Like w, but restricted to SVE vector registers Z0 to Z7 inclusive.
- ``Uph``: One of the upper eight SVE predicate registers (P8 to P15)
- ``Upl``: One of the lower eight SVE predicate registers (P0 to P7)
- ``Upa``: Any of the SVE predicate registers (P0 to P15)

AMDGPU:

- ``r``: A 32 or 64-bit integer register.
- ``[0-9]v``: The 32-bit VGPR register, number 0-9.
- ``[0-9]s``: The 32-bit SGPR register, number 0-9.
- ``[0-9]a``: The 32-bit AGPR register, number 0-9.
- ``I``: An integer inline constant in the range from -16 to 64.
- ``J``: A 16-bit signed integer constant.
- ``A``: An integer or a floating-point inline constant.
- ``B``: A 32-bit signed integer constant.
- ``C``: A 32-bit unsigned integer constant or an integer inline constant in the range from -16 to 64.
- ``DA``: A 64-bit constant that can be split into two "A" constants.
- ``DB``: A 64-bit constant that can be split into two "B" constants.

All ARM modes:

- ``Q``, ``Um``, ``Un``, ``Uq``, ``Us``, ``Ut``, ``Uv``, ``Uy``: Memory address
  operand. Treated the same as operand ``m``, at the moment.
- ``Te``: An even general-purpose 32-bit integer register: ``r0,r2,...,r12,r14``
- ``To``: An odd general-purpose 32-bit integer register: ``r1,r3,...,r11``

ARM and ARM's Thumb2 mode:

- ``j``: An immediate integer between 0 and 65535 (valid for ``MOVW``)
- ``I``: An immediate integer valid for a data-processing instruction.
- ``J``: An immediate integer between -4095 and 4095.
- ``K``: An immediate integer whose bitwise inverse is valid for a
  data-processing instruction. (Can be used with template modifier "``B``" to
  print the inverted value).
- ``L``: An immediate integer whose negation is valid for a data-processing
  instruction. (Can be used with template modifier "``n``" to print the negated
  value).
- ``M``: A power of two or an integer between 0 and 32.
- ``N``: Invalid immediate constraint.
- ``O``: Invalid immediate constraint.
- ``r``: A general-purpose 32-bit integer register (``r0-r15``).
- ``l``: In Thumb2 mode, low 32-bit GPR registers (``r0-r7``). In ARM mode, same
  as ``r``.
- ``h``: In Thumb2 mode, a high 32-bit GPR register (``r8-r15``). In ARM mode,
  invalid.
- ``w``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point/SIMD register in the ranges
  ``s0-s31``, ``d0-d31``, or ``q0-q15``, respectively.
- ``t``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point/SIMD register in the ranges
  ``s0-s31``, ``d0-d15``, or ``q0-q7``, respectively.
- ``x``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point/SIMD register in the ranges
  ``s0-s15``, ``d0-d7``, or ``q0-q3``, respectively.

ARM's Thumb1 mode:

- ``I``: An immediate integer between 0 and 255.
- ``J``: An immediate integer between -255 and -1.
- ``K``: An immediate integer between 0 and 255, with optional left-shift by
  some amount.
- ``L``: An immediate integer between -7 and 7.
- ``M``: An immediate integer which is a multiple of 4 between 0 and 1020.
- ``N``: An immediate integer between 0 and 31.
- ``O``: An immediate integer which is a multiple of 4 between -508 and 508.
- ``r``: A low 32-bit GPR register (``r0-r7``).
- ``l``: A low 32-bit GPR register (``r0-r7``).
- ``h``: A high GPR register (``r0-r7``).
- ``w``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point/SIMD register in the ranges
  ``s0-s31``, ``d0-d31``, or ``q0-q15``, respectively.
- ``t``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point/SIMD register in the ranges
  ``s0-s31``, ``d0-d15``, or ``q0-q7``, respectively.
- ``x``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point/SIMD register in the ranges
  ``s0-s15``, ``d0-d7``, or ``q0-q3``, respectively.

Hexagon:

- ``o``, ``v``: A memory address operand, treated the same as constraint ``m``,
  at the moment.
- ``r``: A 32 or 64-bit register.

LoongArch:

- ``f``: A floating-point register (if available).
- ``k``: A memory operand whose address is formed by a base register and
  (optionally scaled) index register.
- ``l``: A signed 16-bit constant.
- ``m``: A memory operand whose address is formed by a base register and
  offset that is suitable for use in instructions with the same addressing
  mode as st.w and ld.w.
- ``I``: A signed 12-bit constant (for arithmetic instructions).
- ``J``: An immediate integer zero.
- ``K``: An unsigned 12-bit constant (for logic instructions).
- ``ZB``: An address that is held in a general-purpose register. The offset
  is zero.
- ``ZC``: A memory operand whose address is formed by a base register and
  offset that is suitable for use in instructions with the same addressing
  mode as ll.w and sc.w.

MSP430:

- ``r``: An 8 or 16-bit register.

MIPS:

- ``I``: An immediate signed 16-bit integer.
- ``J``: An immediate integer zero.
- ``K``: An immediate unsigned 16-bit integer.
- ``L``: An immediate 32-bit integer, where the lower 16 bits are 0.
- ``N``: An immediate integer between -65535 and -1.
- ``O``: An immediate signed 15-bit integer.
- ``P``: An immediate integer between 1 and 65535.
- ``m``: A memory address operand. In MIPS-SE mode, allows a base address
  register plus 16-bit immediate offset. In MIPS mode, just a base register.
- ``R``: A memory address operand. In MIPS-SE mode, allows a base address
  register plus a 9-bit signed offset. In MIPS mode, the same as constraint
  ``m``.
- ``ZC``: A memory address operand, suitable for use in a ``pref``, ``ll``, or
  ``sc`` instruction on the given subtarget (details vary).
- ``r``, ``d``,  ``y``: A 32 or 64-bit GPR register.
- ``f``: A 32 or 64-bit FPU register (``F0-F31``), or a 128-bit MSA register
  (``W0-W31``). In the case of MSA registers, it is recommended to use the ``w``
  argument modifier for compatibility with GCC.
- ``c``: A 32-bit or 64-bit GPR register suitable for indirect jump (always
  ``25``).
- ``l``: The ``lo`` register, 32 or 64-bit.
- ``x``: Invalid.

NVPTX:

- ``b``: A 1-bit integer register.
- ``c`` or ``h``: A 16-bit integer register.
- ``r``: A 32-bit integer register.
- ``l`` or ``N``: A 64-bit integer register.
- ``q``: A 128-bit integer register.
- ``f``: A 32-bit float register.
- ``d``: A 64-bit float register.


PowerPC:

- ``I``: An immediate signed 16-bit integer.
- ``J``: An immediate unsigned 16-bit integer, shifted left 16 bits.
- ``K``: An immediate unsigned 16-bit integer.
- ``L``: An immediate signed 16-bit integer, shifted left 16 bits.
- ``M``: An immediate integer greater than 31.
- ``N``: An immediate integer that is an exact power of 2.
- ``O``: The immediate integer constant 0.
- ``P``: An immediate integer constant whose negation is a signed 16-bit
  constant.
- ``es``, ``o``, ``Q``, ``Z``, ``Zy``: A memory address operand, currently
  treated the same as ``m``.
- ``r``: A 32 or 64-bit integer register.
- ``b``: A 32 or 64-bit integer register, excluding ``R0`` (that is:
  ``R1-R31``).
- ``f``: A 32 or 64-bit float register (``F0-F31``),
- ``v``: For ``4 x f32`` or ``4 x f64`` types, a 128-bit altivec vector
   register (``V0-V31``).

- ``y``: Condition register (``CR0-CR7``).
- ``wc``: An individual CR bit in a CR register.
- ``wa``, ``wd``, ``wf``: Any 128-bit VSX vector register, from the full VSX
  register set (overlapping both the floating-point and vector register files).
- ``ws``: A 32 or 64-bit floating-point register, from the full VSX register
  set.

RISC-V:

- ``A``: An address operand (using a general-purpose register, without an
  offset).
- ``I``: A 12-bit signed integer immediate operand.
- ``J``: A zero integer immediate operand.
- ``K``: A 5-bit unsigned integer immediate operand.
- ``f``: A 32- or 64-bit floating-point register (requires F or D extension).
- ``r``: A 32- or 64-bit general-purpose register (depending on the platform
  ``XLEN``).
- ``S``: Alias for ``s``.
- ``vr``: A vector register. (requires V extension).
- ``vm``: A vector register for masking operand. (requires V extension).

Sparc:

- ``I``: An immediate 13-bit signed integer.
- ``r``: A 32-bit integer register.
- ``f``: Any floating-point register on SparcV8, or a floating-point
  register in the "low" half of the registers on SparcV9.
- ``e``: Any floating-point register. (Same as ``f`` on SparcV8.)

SystemZ:

- ``I``: An immediate unsigned 8-bit integer.
- ``J``: An immediate unsigned 12-bit integer.
- ``K``: An immediate signed 16-bit integer.
- ``L``: An immediate signed 20-bit integer.
- ``M``: An immediate integer 0x7fffffff.
- ``Q``: A memory address operand with a base address and a 12-bit immediate
  unsigned displacement.
- ``R``: A memory address operand with a base address, a 12-bit immediate
  unsigned displacement, and an index register.
- ``S``: A memory address operand with a base address and a 20-bit immediate
  signed displacement.
- ``T``: A memory address operand with a base address, a 20-bit immediate
  signed displacement, and an index register.
- ``r`` or ``d``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit integer register.
- ``a``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit integer address register (excludes R0, which in an
  address context evaluates as zero).
- ``h``: A 32-bit value in the high part of a 64bit data register
  (LLVM-specific)
- ``f``: A 32, 64, or 128-bit floating-point register.

X86:

- ``I``: An immediate integer between 0 and 31.
- ``J``: An immediate integer between 0 and 64.
- ``K``: An immediate signed 8-bit integer.
- ``L``: An immediate integer, 0xff or 0xffff or (in 64-bit mode only)
  0xffffffff.
- ``M``: An immediate integer between 0 and 3.
- ``N``: An immediate unsigned 8-bit integer.
- ``O``: An immediate integer between 0 and 127.
- ``e``: An immediate 32-bit signed integer.
- ``Z``: An immediate 32-bit unsigned integer.
- ``q``: An 8, 16, 32, or 64-bit register which can be accessed as an 8-bit
  ``l`` integer register. On X86-32, this is the ``a``, ``b``, ``c``, and ``d``
  registers, and on X86-64, it is all of the integer registers. When feature
  `egpr` and `inline-asm-use-gpr32` are both on, it will be extended to gpr32.
- ``Q``: An 8, 16, 32, or 64-bit register which can be accessed as an 8-bit
  ``h`` integer register. This is the ``a``, ``b``, ``c``, and ``d`` registers.
- ``r`` or ``l``: An 8, 16, 32, or 64-bit integer register. When feature
  `egpr` and `inline-asm-use-gpr32` are both on, it will be extended to gpr32.
- ``R``: An 8, 16, 32, or 64-bit "legacy" integer register -- one which has
  existed since i386, and can be accessed without the REX prefix.
- ``f``: A 32, 64, or 80-bit '387 FPU stack pseudo-register.
- ``y``: A 64-bit MMX register, if MMX is enabled.
- ``v``: If SSE is enabled: a 32 or 64-bit scalar operand, or 128-bit vector
  operand in a SSE register. If AVX is also enabled, can also be a 256-bit
  vector operand in an AVX register. If AVX-512 is also enabled, can also be a
  512-bit vector operand in an AVX512 register. Otherwise, an error.
- ``Ws``: A symbolic reference with an optional constant addend or a label
  reference.
- ``x``: The same as ``v``, except that when AVX-512 is enabled, the ``x`` code
  only allocates into the first 16 AVX-512 registers, while the ``v`` code
  allocates into any of the 32 AVX-512 registers.
- ``Y``: The same as ``x``, if *SSE2* is enabled, otherwise an error.
- ``A``: Special case: allocates EAX first, then EDX, for a single operand (in
  32-bit mode, a 64-bit integer operand will get split into two registers). It
  is not recommended to use this constraint, as in 64-bit mode, the 64-bit
  operand will get allocated only to RAX -- if two 32-bit operands are needed,
  you're better off splitting it yourself, before passing it to the asm
  statement.
- ``jr``: An 8, 16, 32, or 64-bit integer gpr16. It won't be extended to gpr32
  when feature `egpr` or `inline-asm-use-gpr32` is on.
- ``jR``: An 8, 16, 32, or 64-bit integer gpr32 when feature `egpr`` is on.
  Otherwise, same as ``r``.

XCore:

- ``r``: A 32-bit integer register.


.. _inline-asm-modifiers:

Asm template argument modifiers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the asm template string, modifiers can be used on the operand reference, like
"``${0:n}``".

The modifiers are, in general, expected to behave the same way they do in
GCC. LLVM's support is often implemented on an 'as-needed' basis, to support C
inline asm code which was supported by GCC. A mismatch in behavior between LLVM
and GCC likely indicates a bug in LLVM.

Target-independent:

- ``c``: Print an immediate integer constant unadorned, without
  the target-specific immediate punctuation (e.g. no ``$`` prefix).
- ``n``: Negate and print immediate integer constant unadorned, without the
  target-specific immediate punctuation (e.g. no ``$`` prefix).
- ``l``: Print as an unadorned label, without the target-specific label
  punctuation (e.g. no ``$`` prefix).

AArch64:

- ``w``: Print a GPR register with a ``w*`` name instead of ``x*`` name. E.g.,
  instead of ``x30``, print ``w30``.
- ``x``: Print a GPR register with a ``x*`` name. (this is the default, anyhow).
- ``b``, ``h``, ``s``, ``d``, ``q``: Print a floating-point/SIMD register with a
  ``b*``, ``h*``, ``s*``, ``d*``, or ``q*`` name, rather than the default of
  ``v*``.

AMDGPU:

- ``r``: No effect.

ARM:

- ``a``: Print an operand as an address (with ``[`` and ``]`` surrounding a
  register).
- ``P``: No effect.
- ``q``: No effect.
- ``y``: Print a VFP single-precision register as an indexed double (e.g. print
  as ``d4[1]`` instead of ``s9``)
- ``B``: Bitwise invert and print an immediate integer constant without ``#``
  prefix.
- ``L``: Print the low 16-bits of an immediate integer constant.
- ``M``: Print as a register set suitable for ldm/stm. Also prints *all*
  register operands subsequent to the specified one (!), so use carefully.
- ``Q``: Print the low-order register of a register-pair, or the low-order
  register of a two-register operand.
- ``R``: Print the high-order register of a register-pair, or the high-order
  register of a two-register operand.
- ``H``: Print the second register of a register-pair. (On a big-endian system,
  ``H`` is equivalent to ``Q``, and on little-endian system, ``H`` is equivalent
  to ``R``.)

  .. FIXME: H doesn't currently support printing the second register
     of a two-register operand.

- ``e``: Print the low doubleword register of a NEON quad register.
- ``f``: Print the high doubleword register of a NEON quad register.
- ``m``: Print the base register of a memory operand without the ``[`` and ``]``
  adornment.

Hexagon:

- ``L``: Print the second register of a two-register operand. Requires that it
  has been allocated consecutively to the first.

  .. FIXME: why is it restricted to consecutive ones? And there's
     nothing that ensures that happens, is there?

- ``I``: Print the letter 'i' if the operand is an integer constant, otherwise
  nothing. Used to print 'addi' vs 'add' instructions.

LoongArch:

- ``z``: Print $zero register if operand is zero, otherwise print it normally.

MSP430:

No additional modifiers.

MIPS:

- ``X``: Print an immediate integer as hexadecimal
- ``x``: Print the low 16 bits of an immediate integer as hexadecimal.
- ``d``: Print an immediate integer as decimal.
- ``m``: Subtract one and print an immediate integer as decimal.
- ``z``: Print $0 if an immediate zero, otherwise print normally.
- ``L``: Print the low-order register of a two-register operand, or prints the
  address of the low-order word of a double-word memory operand.

  .. FIXME: L seems to be missing memory operand support.

- ``M``: Print the high-order register of a two-register operand, or prints the
  address of the high-order word of a double-word memory operand.

  .. FIXME: M seems to be missing memory operand support.

- ``D``: Print the second register of a two-register operand, or prints the
  second word of a double-word memory operand. (On a big-endian system, ``D`` is
  equivalent to ``L``, and on little-endian system, ``D`` is equivalent to
  ``M``.)
- ``w``: No effect. Provided for compatibility with GCC which requires this
  modifier in order to print MSA registers (``W0-W31``) with the ``f``
  constraint.

NVPTX:

- ``r``: No effect.

PowerPC:

- ``L``: Print the second register of a two-register operand. Requires that it
  has been allocated consecutively to the first.

  .. FIXME: why is it restricted to consecutive ones? And there's
     nothing that ensures that happens, is there?

- ``I``: Print the letter 'i' if the operand is an integer constant, otherwise
  nothing. Used to print 'addi' vs 'add' instructions.
- ``y``: For a memory operand, prints formatter for a two-register X-form
  instruction. (Currently always prints ``r0,OPERAND``).
- ``U``: Prints 'u' if the memory operand is an update form, and nothing
  otherwise. (NOTE: LLVM does not support update form, so this will currently
  always print nothing)
- ``X``: Prints 'x' if the memory operand is an indexed form. (NOTE: LLVM does
  not support indexed form, so this will currently always print nothing)

RISC-V:

- ``i``: Print the letter 'i' if the operand is not a register, otherwise print
  nothing. Used to print 'addi' vs 'add' instructions, etc.
- ``z``: Print the register ``zero`` if an immediate zero, otherwise print
  normally.

Sparc:

- ``L``: Print the low-order register of a two-register operand.
- ``H``: Print the high-order register of a two-register operand.
- ``r``: No effect.

SystemZ:

SystemZ implements only ``n``, and does *not* support any of the other
target-independent modifiers.

X86:

- ``c``: Print an unadorned integer or symbol name. (The latter is
  target-specific behavior for this typically target-independent modifier).
- ``A``: Print a register name with a '``*``' before it.
- ``b``: Print an 8-bit register name (e.g. ``al``); do nothing on a memory
  operand.
- ``h``: Print the upper 8-bit register name (e.g. ``ah``); do nothing on a
  memory operand.
- ``w``: Print the 16-bit register name (e.g. ``ax``); do nothing on a memory
  operand.
- ``k``: Print the 32-bit register name (e.g. ``eax``); do nothing on a memory
  operand.
- ``q``: Print the 64-bit register name (e.g. ``rax``), if 64-bit registers are
  available, otherwise the 32-bit register name; do nothing on a memory operand.
- ``n``: Negate and print an unadorned integer, or, for operands other than an
  immediate integer (e.g. a relocatable symbol expression), print a '-' before
  the operand. (The behavior for relocatable symbol expressions is a
  target-specific behavior for this typically target-independent modifier)
- ``H``: Print a memory reference with additional offset +8.
- ``p``: Print a raw symbol name (without syntax-specific prefixes).
- ``P``: Print a memory reference used as the argument of a call instruction or
  used with explicit base reg and index reg as its offset. So it can not use
  additional regs to present the memory reference. (E.g. omit ``(rip)``, even
  though it's PC-relative.)

XCore:

No additional modifiers.


Inline Asm Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The call instructions that wrap inline asm nodes may have a
"``!srcloc``" MDNode attached to it that contains a list of constant
integers. If present, the code generator will use the integer as the
location cookie value when report errors through the ``LLVMContext``
error reporting mechanisms. This allows a front-end to correlate backend
errors that occur with inline asm back to the source code that produced
it. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

    call void asm sideeffect "something bad", ""(), !srcloc !42
    ...
    !42 = !{ i64 1234567 }

It is up to the front-end to make sense of the magic numbers it places
in the IR. If the MDNode contains multiple constants, the code generator
will use the one that corresponds to the line of the asm that the error
occurs on.

.. _metadata:

Metadata
========

LLVM IR allows metadata to be attached to instructions and global objects in
the program that can convey extra information about the code to the optimizers
and code generator.

There are two metadata primitives: strings and nodes. There are
also specialized nodes which have a distinguished name and a set of named
arguments.

.. note::

    One example application of metadata is source-level debug information,
    which is currently the only user of specialized nodes.

Metadata does not have a type, and is not a value.

A value of non-\ ``metadata`` type can be used in a metadata context using the
syntax '``<type> <value>``'.

All other metadata is identified in syntax as starting with an exclamation
point ('``!``').

Metadata may be used in the following value contexts by using the ``metadata``
type:

- Arguments to certain intrinsic functions, as described in their specification.
- Arguments to the ``catchpad``/``cleanuppad`` instructions.

.. note::

    Metadata can be "wrapped" in a ``MetadataAsValue`` so it can be referenced
    in a value context: ``MetadataAsValue`` is-a ``Value``.

    A typed value can be "wrapped" in ``ValueAsMetadata`` so it can be
    referenced in a metadata context: ``ValueAsMetadata`` is-a ``Metadata``.

    There is no explicit syntax for a ``ValueAsMetadata``, and instead
    the fact that a type identifier cannot begin with an exclamation point
    is used to resolve ambiguity.

    A ``metadata`` type implies a ``MetadataAsValue``, and when followed with a
    '``<type> <value>``' pair it wraps the typed value in a ``ValueAsMetadata``.

    For example, the first argument
    to this call is a ``MetadataAsValue(ValueAsMetadata(Value))``:

    .. code-block:: llvm

        call void @llvm.foo(metadata i32 1)

    Whereas the first argument to this call is a ``MetadataAsValue(MDNode)``:

    .. code-block:: llvm

        call void @llvm.foo(metadata !0)

    The first element of this ``MDTuple`` is a ``MDNode``:

    .. code-block:: llvm

        !{!0}

    And the first element of this ``MDTuple`` is a ``ValueAsMetadata(Value)``:

    .. code-block:: llvm

        !{i32 1}

.. _metadata-string:

Metadata Strings (``MDString``)
-------------------------------

.. FIXME Either fix all references to "MDString" in the docs, or make that
   identifier a formal part of the document.

A metadata string is a string surrounded by double quotes. It can
contain any character by escaping non-printable characters with
"``\xx``" where "``xx``" is the two digit hex code. For example:
"``!"test\00"``".

.. note::

   A metadata string is metadata, but is not a metadata node.

.. _metadata-node:

Metadata Nodes (``MDNode``)
---------------------------

.. FIXME Either fix all references to "MDNode" in the docs, or make that
   identifier a formal part of the document.

Metadata tuples are represented with notation similar to structure
constants: a comma separated list of elements, surrounded by braces and
preceded by an exclamation point. Metadata nodes can have any values as
their operand. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

    !{!"test\00", i32 10}

Metadata nodes that aren't uniqued use the ``distinct`` keyword. For example:

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = distinct !{!"test\00", i32 10}

``distinct`` nodes are useful when nodes shouldn't be merged based on their
content. They can also occur when transformations cause uniquing collisions
when metadata operands change.

A :ref:`named metadata <namedmetadatastructure>` is a collection of
metadata nodes, which can be looked up in the module symbol table. For
example:

.. code-block:: llvm

    !foo = !{!4, !3}

Metadata can be used as function arguments. Here the ``llvm.dbg.value``
intrinsic is using three metadata arguments:

.. code-block:: llvm

    call void @llvm.dbg.value(metadata !24, metadata !25, metadata !26)


.. FIXME Attachments cannot be ValueAsMetadata, but we don't have a
   particularly clear way to refer to ValueAsMetadata without getting into
   implementation details. Ideally the restriction would be explicit somewhere,
   though?

Metadata can be attached to an instruction. Here metadata ``!21`` is attached
to the ``add`` instruction using the ``!dbg`` identifier:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %indvar.next = add i64 %indvar, 1, !dbg !21

Instructions may not have multiple metadata attachments with the same
identifier.

Metadata can also be attached to a function or a global variable. Here metadata
``!22`` is attached to the ``f1`` and ``f2`` functions, and the globals ``g1``
and ``g2`` using the ``!dbg`` identifier:

.. code-block:: llvm

    declare !dbg !22 void @f1()
    define void @f2() !dbg !22 {
      ret void
    }

    @g1 = global i32 0, !dbg !22
    @g2 = external global i32, !dbg !22

Unlike instructions, global objects (functions and global variables) may have
multiple metadata attachments with the same identifier.

A transformation is required to drop any metadata attachment that it
does not know or know it can't preserve. Currently there is an
exception for metadata attachment to globals for ``!func_sanitize``,
``!type``, ``!absolute_symbol`` and ``!associated`` which can't be
unconditionally dropped unless the global is itself deleted.

Metadata attached to a module using named metadata may not be dropped, with
the exception of debug metadata (named metadata with the name ``!llvm.dbg.*``).

More information about specific metadata nodes recognized by the
optimizers and code generator is found below.

.. _specialized-metadata:

Specialized Metadata Nodes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specialized metadata nodes are custom data structures in metadata (as opposed
to generic tuples). Their fields are labelled, and can be specified in any
order.

These aren't inherently debug info centric, but currently all the specialized
metadata nodes are related to debug info.

.. _DICompileUnit:

DICompileUnit
"""""""""""""

``DICompileUnit`` nodes represent a compile unit. The ``enums:``,
``retainedTypes:``, ``globals:``, ``imports:`` and ``macros:`` fields are tuples
containing the debug info to be emitted along with the compile unit, regardless
of code optimizations (some nodes are only emitted if there are references to
them from instructions). The ``debugInfoForProfiling:`` field is a boolean
indicating whether or not line-table discriminators are updated to provide
more-accurate debug info for profiling results.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DICompileUnit(language: DW_LANG_C99, file: !1, producer: "clang",
                        isOptimized: true, flags: "-O2", runtimeVersion: 2,
                        splitDebugFilename: "abc.debug", emissionKind: FullDebug,
                        enums: !2, retainedTypes: !3, globals: !4, imports: !5,
                        macros: !6, dwoId: 0x0abcd)

Compile unit descriptors provide the root scope for objects declared in a
specific compilation unit. File descriptors are defined using this scope.  These
descriptors are collected by a named metadata node ``!llvm.dbg.cu``. They keep
track of global variables, type information, and imported entities (declarations
and namespaces).

.. _DIFile:

DIFile
""""""

``DIFile`` nodes represent files. The ``filename:`` can include slashes.

.. code-block:: none

    !0 = !DIFile(filename: "path/to/file", directory: "/path/to/dir",
                 checksumkind: CSK_MD5,
                 checksum: "000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0f")

Files are sometimes used in ``scope:`` fields, and are the only valid target
for ``file:`` fields.

The ``checksum:`` and ``checksumkind:`` fields are optional. If one of these
fields is present, then the other is required to be present as well. Valid
values for ``checksumkind:`` field are: {CSK_MD5, CSK_SHA1, CSK_SHA256}

.. _DIBasicType:

DIBasicType
"""""""""""

``DIBasicType`` nodes represent primitive types, such as ``int``, ``bool`` and
``float``. ``tag:`` defaults to ``DW_TAG_base_type``.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DIBasicType(name: "unsigned char", size: 8, align: 8,
                      encoding: DW_ATE_unsigned_char)
    !1 = !DIBasicType(tag: DW_TAG_unspecified_type, name: "decltype(nullptr)")

The ``encoding:`` describes the details of the type. Usually it's one of the
following:

.. code-block:: text

  DW_ATE_address       = 1
  DW_ATE_boolean       = 2
  DW_ATE_float         = 4
  DW_ATE_signed        = 5
  DW_ATE_signed_char   = 6
  DW_ATE_unsigned      = 7
  DW_ATE_unsigned_char = 8

.. _DISubroutineType:

DISubroutineType
""""""""""""""""

``DISubroutineType`` nodes represent subroutine types. Their ``types:`` field
refers to a tuple; the first operand is the return type, while the rest are the
types of the formal arguments in order. If the first operand is ``null``, that
represents a function with no return value (such as ``void foo() {}`` in C++).

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !BasicType(name: "int", size: 32, align: 32, DW_ATE_signed)
    !1 = !BasicType(name: "char", size: 8, align: 8, DW_ATE_signed_char)
    !2 = !DISubroutineType(types: !{null, !0, !1}) ; void (int, char)

.. _DIDerivedType:

DIDerivedType
"""""""""""""

``DIDerivedType`` nodes represent types derived from other types, such as
qualified types.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DIBasicType(name: "unsigned char", size: 8, align: 8,
                      encoding: DW_ATE_unsigned_char)
    !1 = !DIDerivedType(tag: DW_TAG_pointer_type, baseType: !0, size: 32,
                        align: 32)

The following ``tag:`` values are valid:

.. code-block:: text

  DW_TAG_member             = 13
  DW_TAG_pointer_type       = 15
  DW_TAG_reference_type     = 16
  DW_TAG_typedef            = 22
  DW_TAG_inheritance        = 28
  DW_TAG_ptr_to_member_type = 31
  DW_TAG_const_type         = 38
  DW_TAG_friend             = 42
  DW_TAG_volatile_type      = 53
  DW_TAG_restrict_type      = 55
  DW_TAG_atomic_type        = 71
  DW_TAG_immutable_type     = 75

.. _DIDerivedTypeMember:

``DW_TAG_member`` is used to define a member of a :ref:`composite type
<DICompositeType>`. The type of the member is the ``baseType:``. The
``offset:`` is the member's bit offset.  If the composite type has an ODR
``identifier:`` and does not set ``flags: DIFwdDecl``, then the member is
uniqued based only on its ``name:`` and ``scope:``.

``DW_TAG_inheritance`` and ``DW_TAG_friend`` are used in the ``elements:``
field of :ref:`composite types <DICompositeType>` to describe parents and
friends.

``DW_TAG_typedef`` is used to provide a name for the ``baseType:``.

``DW_TAG_pointer_type``, ``DW_TAG_reference_type``, ``DW_TAG_const_type``,
``DW_TAG_volatile_type``, ``DW_TAG_restrict_type``, ``DW_TAG_atomic_type`` and
``DW_TAG_immutable_type`` are used to qualify the ``baseType:``.

Note that the ``void *`` type is expressed as a type derived from NULL.

.. _DICompositeType:

DICompositeType
"""""""""""""""

``DICompositeType`` nodes represent types composed of other types, like
structures and unions. ``elements:`` points to a tuple of the composed types.

If the source language supports ODR, the ``identifier:`` field gives the unique
identifier used for type merging between modules.  When specified,
:ref:`subprogram declarations <DISubprogramDeclaration>` and :ref:`member
derived types <DIDerivedTypeMember>` that reference the ODR-type in their
``scope:`` change uniquing rules.

For a given ``identifier:``, there should only be a single composite type that
does not have  ``flags: DIFlagFwdDecl`` set.  LLVM tools that link modules
together will unique such definitions at parse time via the ``identifier:``
field, even if the nodes are ``distinct``.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DIEnumerator(name: "SixKind", value: 7)
    !1 = !DIEnumerator(name: "SevenKind", value: 7)
    !2 = !DIEnumerator(name: "NegEightKind", value: -8)
    !3 = !DICompositeType(tag: DW_TAG_enumeration_type, name: "Enum", file: !12,
                          line: 2, size: 32, align: 32, identifier: "_M4Enum",
                          elements: !{!0, !1, !2})

The following ``tag:`` values are valid:

.. code-block:: text

  DW_TAG_array_type       = 1
  DW_TAG_class_type       = 2
  DW_TAG_enumeration_type = 4
  DW_TAG_structure_type   = 19
  DW_TAG_union_type       = 23

For ``DW_TAG_array_type``, the ``elements:`` should be :ref:`subrange
descriptors <DISubrange>`, each representing the range of subscripts at that
level of indexing. The ``DIFlagVector`` flag to ``flags:`` indicates that an
array type is a native packed vector. The optional ``dataLocation`` is a
DIExpression that describes how to get from an object's address to the actual
raw data, if they aren't equivalent. This is only supported for array types,
particularly to describe Fortran arrays, which have an array descriptor in
addition to the array data. Alternatively it can also be DIVariable which
has the address of the actual raw data. The Fortran language supports pointer
arrays which can be attached to actual arrays, this attachment between pointer
and pointee is called association.  The optional ``associated`` is a
DIExpression that describes whether the pointer array is currently associated.
The optional ``allocated`` is a DIExpression that describes whether the
allocatable array is currently allocated.  The optional ``rank`` is a
DIExpression that describes the rank (number of dimensions) of fortran assumed
rank array (rank is known at runtime).

For ``DW_TAG_enumeration_type``, the ``elements:`` should be :ref:`enumerator
descriptors <DIEnumerator>`, each representing the definition of an enumeration
value for the set. All enumeration type descriptors are collected in the
``enums:`` field of the :ref:`compile unit <DICompileUnit>`.

For ``DW_TAG_structure_type``, ``DW_TAG_class_type``, and
``DW_TAG_union_type``, the ``elements:`` should be :ref:`derived types
<DIDerivedType>` with ``tag: DW_TAG_member``, ``tag: DW_TAG_inheritance``, or
``tag: DW_TAG_friend``; or :ref:`subprograms <DISubprogram>` with
``isDefinition: false``.

.. _DISubrange:

DISubrange
""""""""""

``DISubrange`` nodes are the elements for ``DW_TAG_array_type`` variants of
:ref:`DICompositeType`.

- ``count: -1`` indicates an empty array.
- ``count: !10`` describes the count with a :ref:`DILocalVariable`.
- ``count: !12`` describes the count with a :ref:`DIGlobalVariable`.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DISubrange(count: 5, lowerBound: 0) ; array counting from 0
    !1 = !DISubrange(count: 5, lowerBound: 1) ; array counting from 1
    !2 = !DISubrange(count: -1) ; empty array.

    ; Scopes used in rest of example
    !6 = !DIFile(filename: "vla.c", directory: "/path/to/file")
    !7 = distinct !DICompileUnit(language: DW_LANG_C99, file: !6)
    !8 = distinct !DISubprogram(name: "foo", scope: !7, file: !6, line: 5)

    ; Use of local variable as count value
    !9 = !DIBasicType(name: "int", size: 32, encoding: DW_ATE_signed)
    !10 = !DILocalVariable(name: "count", scope: !8, file: !6, line: 42, type: !9)
    !11 = !DISubrange(count: !10, lowerBound: 0)

    ; Use of global variable as count value
    !12 = !DIGlobalVariable(name: "count", scope: !8, file: !6, line: 22, type: !9)
    !13 = !DISubrange(count: !12, lowerBound: 0)

.. _DIEnumerator:

DIEnumerator
""""""""""""

``DIEnumerator`` nodes are the elements for ``DW_TAG_enumeration_type``
variants of :ref:`DICompositeType`.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DIEnumerator(name: "SixKind", value: 7)
    !1 = !DIEnumerator(name: "SevenKind", value: 7)
    !2 = !DIEnumerator(name: "NegEightKind", value: -8)

DITemplateTypeParameter
"""""""""""""""""""""""

``DITemplateTypeParameter`` nodes represent type parameters to generic source
language constructs. They are used (optionally) in :ref:`DICompositeType` and
:ref:`DISubprogram` ``templateParams:`` fields.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DITemplateTypeParameter(name: "Ty", type: !1)

DITemplateValueParameter
""""""""""""""""""""""""

``DITemplateValueParameter`` nodes represent value parameters to generic source
language constructs. ``tag:`` defaults to ``DW_TAG_template_value_parameter``,
but if specified can also be set to ``DW_TAG_GNU_template_template_param`` or
``DW_TAG_GNU_template_param_pack``. They are used (optionally) in
:ref:`DICompositeType` and :ref:`DISubprogram` ``templateParams:`` fields.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DITemplateValueParameter(name: "Ty", type: !1, value: i32 7)

DINamespace
"""""""""""

``DINamespace`` nodes represent namespaces in the source language.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DINamespace(name: "myawesomeproject", scope: !1, file: !2, line: 7)

.. _DIGlobalVariable:

DIGlobalVariable
""""""""""""""""

``DIGlobalVariable`` nodes represent global variables in the source language.

.. code-block:: text

    @foo = global i32, !dbg !0
    !0 = !DIGlobalVariableExpression(var: !1, expr: !DIExpression())
    !1 = !DIGlobalVariable(name: "foo", linkageName: "foo", scope: !2,
                           file: !3, line: 7, type: !4, isLocal: true,
                           isDefinition: false, declaration: !5)


DIGlobalVariableExpression
""""""""""""""""""""""""""

``DIGlobalVariableExpression`` nodes tie a :ref:`DIGlobalVariable` together
with a :ref:`DIExpression`.

.. code-block:: text

    @lower = global i32, !dbg !0
    @upper = global i32, !dbg !1
    !0 = !DIGlobalVariableExpression(
             var: !2,
             expr: !DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_fragment, 0, 32)
             )
    !1 = !DIGlobalVariableExpression(
             var: !2,
             expr: !DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_fragment, 32, 32)
             )
    !2 = !DIGlobalVariable(name: "split64", linkageName: "split64", scope: !3,
                           file: !4, line: 8, type: !5, declaration: !6)

All global variable expressions should be referenced by the `globals:` field of
a :ref:`compile unit <DICompileUnit>`.

.. _DISubprogram:

DISubprogram
""""""""""""

``DISubprogram`` nodes represent functions from the source language. A distinct
``DISubprogram`` may be attached to a function definition using ``!dbg``
metadata. A unique ``DISubprogram`` may be attached to a function declaration
used for call site debug info. The ``retainedNodes:`` field is a list of
:ref:`variables <DILocalVariable>` and :ref:`labels <DILabel>` that must be
retained, even if their IR counterparts are optimized out of the IR. The
``type:`` field must point at an :ref:`DISubroutineType`.

.. _DISubprogramDeclaration:

When ``spFlags: DISPFlagDefinition`` is not present, subprograms describe a
declaration in the type tree as opposed to a definition of a function. In this
case, the ``declaration`` field must be empty. If the scope is a composite type
with an ODR ``identifier:`` and that does not set ``flags: DIFwdDecl``, then
the subprogram declaration is uniqued based only on its ``linkageName:`` and
``scope:``.

.. code-block:: text

    define void @_Z3foov() !dbg !0 {
      ...
    }

    !0 = distinct !DISubprogram(name: "foo", linkageName: "_Zfoov", scope: !1,
                                file: !2, line: 7, type: !3,
                                spFlags: DISPFlagDefinition | DISPFlagLocalToUnit,
                                scopeLine: 8, containingType: !4,
                                virtuality: DW_VIRTUALITY_pure_virtual,
                                virtualIndex: 10, flags: DIFlagPrototyped,
                                isOptimized: true, unit: !5, templateParams: !6,
                                declaration: !7, retainedNodes: !8,
                                thrownTypes: !9)

.. _DILexicalBlock:

DILexicalBlock
""""""""""""""

``DILexicalBlock`` nodes describe nested blocks within a :ref:`subprogram
<DISubprogram>`. The line number and column numbers are used to distinguish
two lexical blocks at same depth. They are valid targets for ``scope:``
fields.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = distinct !DILexicalBlock(scope: !1, file: !2, line: 7, column: 35)

Usually lexical blocks are ``distinct`` to prevent node merging based on
operands.

.. _DILexicalBlockFile:

DILexicalBlockFile
""""""""""""""""""

``DILexicalBlockFile`` nodes are used to discriminate between sections of a
:ref:`lexical block <DILexicalBlock>`. The ``file:`` field can be changed to
indicate textual inclusion, or the ``discriminator:`` field can be used to
discriminate between control flow within a single block in the source language.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DILexicalBlock(scope: !3, file: !4, line: 7, column: 35)
    !1 = !DILexicalBlockFile(scope: !0, file: !4, discriminator: 0)
    !2 = !DILexicalBlockFile(scope: !0, file: !4, discriminator: 1)

.. _DILocation:

DILocation
""""""""""

``DILocation`` nodes represent source debug locations. The ``scope:`` field is
mandatory, and points at an :ref:`DILexicalBlockFile`, an
:ref:`DILexicalBlock`, or an :ref:`DISubprogram`.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DILocation(line: 2900, column: 42, scope: !1, inlinedAt: !2)

.. _DILocalVariable:

DILocalVariable
"""""""""""""""

``DILocalVariable`` nodes represent local variables in the source language. If
the ``arg:`` field is set to non-zero, then this variable is a subprogram
parameter, and it will be included in the ``retainedNodes:`` field of its
:ref:`DISubprogram`.

.. code-block:: text

    !0 = !DILocalVariable(name: "this", arg: 1, scope: !3, file: !2, line: 7,
                          type: !3, flags: DIFlagArtificial)
    !1 = !DILocalVariable(name: "x", arg: 2, scope: !4, file: !2, line: 7,
                          type: !3)
    !2 = !DILocalVariable(name: "y", scope: !5, file: !2, line: 7, type: !3)

.. _DIExpression:

DIExpression
""""""""""""

``DIExpression`` nodes represent expressions that are inspired by the DWARF
expression language. They are used in :ref:`debug records <debugrecords>`
(such as ``#dbg_declare`` and ``#dbg_value``) to describe how the
referenced LLVM variable relates to the source language variable. Debug
expressions are interpreted left-to-right: start by pushing the value/address
operand of the record onto a stack, then repeatedly push and evaluate
opcodes from the DIExpression until the final variable description is produced.

The current supported opcode vocabulary is limited:

- ``DW_OP_deref`` dereferences the top of the expression stack.
- ``DW_OP_plus`` pops the last two entries from the expression stack, adds
  them together and appends the result to the expression stack.
- ``DW_OP_minus`` pops the last two entries from the expression stack, subtracts
  the last entry from the second last entry and appends the result to the
  expression stack.
- ``DW_OP_plus_uconst, 93`` adds ``93`` to the working expression.
- ``DW_OP_LLVM_fragment, 16, 8`` specifies the offset and size (``16`` and ``8``
  here, respectively) of the variable fragment from the working expression. Note
  that contrary to DW_OP_bit_piece, the offset is describing the location
  within the described source variable.
- ``DW_OP_LLVM_convert, 16, DW_ATE_signed`` specifies a bit size and encoding
  (``16`` and ``DW_ATE_signed`` here, respectively) to which the top of the
  expression stack is to be converted. Maps into a ``DW_OP_convert`` operation
  that references a base type constructed from the supplied values.
- ``DW_OP_LLVM_extract_bits_sext, 16, 8,`` specifies the offset and size
  (``16`` and ``8`` here, respectively) of bits that are to be extracted and
  sign-extended from the value at the top of the expression stack. If the top of
  the expression stack is a memory location then these bits are extracted from
  the value pointed to by that memory location. Maps into a ``DW_OP_shl``
  followed by ``DW_OP_shra``.
- ``DW_OP_LLVM_extract_bits_zext`` behaves similarly to
  ``DW_OP_LLVM_extract_bits_sext``, but zero-extends instead of sign-extending.
  Maps into a ``DW_OP_shl`` followed by ``DW_OP_shr``.
- ``DW_OP_LLVM_tag_offset, tag_offset`` specifies that a memory tag should be
  optionally applied to the pointer. The memory tag is derived from the
  given tag offset in an implementation-defined manner.
- ``DW_OP_swap`` swaps top two stack entries.
- ``DW_OP_xderef`` provides extended dereference mechanism. The entry at the top
  of the stack is treated as an address. The second stack entry is treated as an
  address space identifier.
- ``DW_OP_stack_value`` marks a constant value.
- ``DW_OP_LLVM_entry_value, N`` refers to the value a register had upon
  function entry. When targeting DWARF, a ``DBG_VALUE(reg, ...,
  DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_entry_value, 1, ...)`` is lowered to
  ``DW_OP_entry_value [reg], ...``, which pushes the value ``reg`` had upon
  function entry onto the DWARF expression stack.

  The next ``(N - 1)`` operations will be part of the ``DW_OP_entry_value``
  block argument. For example, ``!DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_entry_value, 1,
  DW_OP_plus_uconst, 123, DW_OP_stack_value)`` specifies an expression where
  the entry value of ``reg`` is pushed onto the stack, and is added with 123.
  Due to framework limitations ``N`` must be 1, in other words,
  ``DW_OP_entry_value`` always refers to the value/address operand of the
  instruction.

  Because ``DW_OP_LLVM_entry_value`` is defined in terms of registers, it is
  usually used in MIR, but it is also allowed in LLVM IR when targeting a
  :ref:`swiftasync <swiftasync>` argument. The operation is introduced by:

    - ``LiveDebugValues`` pass, which applies it to function parameters that
      are unmodified throughout the function. Support is limited to simple
      register location descriptions, or as indirect locations (e.g.,
      parameters passed-by-value to a callee via a pointer to a temporary copy
      made in the caller).
    - ``AsmPrinter`` pass when a call site parameter value
      (``DW_AT_call_site_parameter_value``) is represented as entry value of
      the parameter.
    - ``CoroSplit`` pass, which may move variables from allocas into a
      coroutine frame. If the coroutine frame is a
      :ref:`swiftasync <swiftasync>` argument, the variable is described with
      an ``DW_OP_LLVM_entry_value`` operation.

- ``DW_OP_LLVM_arg, N`` is used in debug intrinsics that refer to more than one
  value, such as one that calculates the sum of two registers. This is always
  used in combination with an ordered list of values, such that
  ``DW_OP_LLVM_arg, N`` refers to the ``N``\ :sup:`th` element in that list. For
  example, ``!DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_arg, 0, DW_OP_LLVM_arg, 1, DW_OP_minus,
  DW_OP_stack_value)`` used with the list ``(%reg1, %reg2)`` would evaluate to
  ``%reg1 - reg2``. This list of values should be provided by the containing
  intrinsic/instruction.
- ``DW_OP_breg`` (or ``DW_OP_bregx``) represents a content on the provided
  signed offset of the specified register. The opcode is only generated by the
  ``AsmPrinter`` pass to describe call site parameter value which requires an
  expression over two registers.
- ``DW_OP_push_object_address`` pushes the address of the object which can then
  serve as a descriptor in subsequent calculation. This opcode can be used to
  calculate bounds of fortran allocatable array which has array descriptors.
- ``DW_OP_over`` duplicates the entry currently second in the stack at the top
  of the stack. This opcode can be used to calculate bounds of fortran assumed
  rank array which has rank known at run time and current dimension number is
  implicitly first element of the stack.
- ``DW_OP_LLVM_implicit_pointer`` It specifies the dereferenced value. It can
  be used to represent pointer variables which are optimized out but the value
  it points to is known. This operator is required as it is different than DWARF
  operator DW_OP_implicit_pointer in representation and specification (number
  and types of operands) and later can not be used as multiple level.

.. code-block:: text

    IR for "*ptr = 4;"
    --------------
      #dbg_value(i32 4, !17, !DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_implicit_pointer), !20)
    !17 = !DILocalVariable(name: "ptr1", scope: !12, file: !3, line: 5,
                           type: !18)
    !18 = !DIDerivedType(tag: DW_TAG_pointer_type, baseType: !19, size: 64)
    !19 = !DIBasicType(name: "int", size: 32, encoding: DW_ATE_signed)
    !20 = !DILocation(line: 10, scope: !12)

    IR for "**ptr = 4;"
    --------------
      #dbg_value(i32 4, !17,
        !DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_implicit_pointer, DW_OP_LLVM_implicit_pointer),
        !21)
    !17 = !DILocalVariable(name: "ptr1", scope: !12, file: !3, line: 5,
                           type: !18)
    !18 = !DIDerivedType(tag: DW_TAG_pointer_type, baseType: !19, size: 64)
    !19 = !DIDerivedType(tag: DW_TAG_pointer_type, baseType: !20, size: 64)
    !20 = !DIBasicType(name: "int", size: 32, encoding: DW_ATE_signed)
    !21 = !DILocation(line: 10, scope: !12)

DWARF specifies three kinds of simple location descriptions: Register, memory,
and implicit location descriptions.  Note that a location description is
defined over certain ranges of a program, i.e the location of a variable may
change over the course of the program. Register and memory location
descriptions describe the *concrete location* of a source variable (in the
sense that a debugger might modify its value), whereas *implicit locations*
describe merely the actual *value* of a source variable which might not exist
in registers or in memory (see ``DW_OP_stack_value``).

A ``#dbg_declare`` record describes an indirect value (the address) of a
source variable. The first operand of the record must be an address of some
kind. A DIExpression operand to the record refines this address to produce a
concrete location for the source variable.

A ``#dbg_value`` record describes the direct value of a source variable.
The first operand of the record may be a direct or indirect value. A
DIExpression operand to the record refines the first operand to produce a
direct value. For example, if the first operand is an indirect value, it may be
necessary to insert ``DW_OP_deref`` into the DIExpression in order to produce a
valid debug record.

.. note::

   A DIExpression is interpreted in the same way regardless of which kind of
   debug record it's attached to.

   DIExpressions are always printed and parsed inline; they can never be
   referenced by an ID (e.g. ``!1``).

.. code-block:: text

    !DIExpression(DW_OP_deref)
    !DIExpression(DW_OP_plus_uconst, 3)
    !DIExpression(DW_OP_constu, 3, DW_OP_plus)
    !DIExpression(DW_OP_bit_piece, 3, 7)
    !DIExpression(DW_OP_deref, DW_OP_constu, 3, DW_OP_plus, DW_OP_LLVM_fragment, 3, 7)
    !DIExpression(DW_OP_constu, 2, DW_OP_swap, DW_OP_xderef)
    !DIExpression(DW_OP_constu, 42, DW_OP_stack_value)

DIAssignID
""""""""""

``DIAssignID`` nodes have no operands and are always distinct. They are used to
link together (:ref:`#dbg_assign records <debugrecords>`) and instructions
that store in IR. See `Debug Info Assignment Tracking
<AssignmentTracking.html>`_ for more info.

.. code-block:: llvm

    store i32 %a, ptr %a.addr, align 4, !DIAssignID !2
    #dbg_assign(%a, !1, !DIExpression(), !2, %a.addr, !DIExpression(), !3)

    !2 = distinct !DIAssignID()

DIArgList
"""""""""

.. FIXME In the implementation this is not a "node", but as it can only appear
   inline in a function context that distinction isn't observable anyway. Even
   if it is not required, it would be nice to be more clear about what is a
   "node", and what that actually means. The names in the implementation could
   also be updated to mirror whatever we decide here.

``DIArgList`` nodes hold a list of constant or SSA value references. These are
used in :ref:`debug records <debugrecords>` in combination with a
``DIExpression`` that uses the
``DW_OP_LLVM_arg`` operator. Because a DIArgList may refer to local values
within a function, it must only be used as a function argument, must always be
inlined, and cannot appear in named metadata.

.. code-block:: text

    #dbg_value(!DIArgList(i32 %a, i32 %b),
               !16,
               !DIExpression(DW_OP_LLVM_arg, 0, DW_OP_LLVM_arg, 1, DW_OP_plus),
               !26)

DIFlags
"""""""

These flags encode various properties of DINodes.

The `ExportSymbols` flag marks a class, struct or union whose members
may be referenced as if they were defined in the containing class or
union. This flag is used to decide whether the DW_AT_export_symbols can
be used for the structure type.

DIObjCProperty
""""""""""""""

``DIObjCProperty`` nodes represent Objective-C property nodes.

.. code-block:: text

    !3 = !DIObjCProperty(name: "foo", file: !1, line: 7, setter: "setFoo",
                         getter: "getFoo", attributes: 7, type: !2)

DIImportedEntity
""""""""""""""""

``DIImportedEntity`` nodes represent entities (such as modules) imported into a
compile unit. The ``elements`` field is a list of renamed entities (such as
variables and subprograms) in the imported entity (such as module).

.. code-block:: text

   !2 = !DIImportedEntity(tag: DW_TAG_imported_module, name: "foo", scope: !0,
                          entity: !1, line: 7, elements: !3)
   !3 = !{!4}
   !4 = !DIImportedEntity(tag: DW_TAG_imported_declaration, name: "bar", scope: !0,
                          entity: !5, line: 7)

DIMacro
"""""""

``DIMacro`` nodes represent definition or undefinition of a macro identifiers.
The ``name:`` field is the macro identifier, followed by macro parameters when
defining a function-like macro, and the ``value`` field is the token-string
used to expand the macro identifier.

.. code-block:: text

   !2 = !DIMacro(macinfo: DW_MACINFO_define, line: 7, name: "foo(x)",
                 value: "((x) + 1)")
   !3 = !DIMacro(macinfo: DW_MACINFO_undef, line: 30, name: "foo")

DIMacroFile
"""""""""""

``DIMacroFile`` nodes represent inclusion of source files.
The ``nodes:`` field is a list of ``DIMacro`` and ``DIMacroFile`` nodes that
appear in the included source file.

.. code-block:: text

   !2 = !DIMacroFile(macinfo: DW_MACINFO_start_file, line: 7, file: !2,
                     nodes: !3)

.. _DILabel:

DILabel
"""""""

``DILabel`` nodes represent labels within a :ref:`DISubprogram`. All fields of
a ``DILabel`` are mandatory. The ``scope:`` field must be one of either a
:ref:`DILexicalBlockFile`, a :ref:`DILexicalBlock`, or a :ref:`DISubprogram`.
The ``name:`` field is the label identifier. The ``file:`` field is the
:ref:`DIFile` the label is present in. The ``line:`` field is the source line
within the file where the label is declared.

.. code-block:: text

  !2 = !DILabel(scope: !0, name: "foo", file: !1, line: 7)

DICommonBlock
"""""""""""""

``DICommonBlock`` nodes represent Fortran common blocks. The ``scope:`` field
is mandatory and points to a :ref:`DILexicalBlockFile`, a
:ref:`DILexicalBlock`, or a :ref:`DISubprogram`. The ``declaration:``,
``name:``, ``file:``, and ``line:`` fields are optional.

DIModule
""""""""

``DIModule`` nodes represent a source language module, for example, a Clang
module, or a Fortran module. The ``scope:`` field is mandatory and points to a
:ref:`DILexicalBlockFile`, a :ref:`DILexicalBlock`, or a :ref:`DISubprogram`.
The ``name:`` field is mandatory. The ``configMacros:``, ``includePath:``,
``apinotes:``, ``file:``, ``line:``, and ``isDecl:`` fields are optional.

DIStringType
""""""""""""

``DIStringType`` nodes represent a Fortran ``CHARACTER(n)`` type, with a
dynamic length and location encoded as an expression.
The ``tag:`` field is optional and defaults to ``DW_TAG_string_type``. The ``name:``,
``stringLength:``, ``stringLengthExpression``, ``stringLocationExpression:``,
``size:``, ``align:``, and ``encoding:`` fields are optional.

If not present, the ``size:`` and ``align:`` fields default to the value zero.

The length in bits of the string is specified by the first of the following
fields present:

- ``stringLength:``, which points to a ``DIVariable`` whose value is the string
  length in bits.
- ``stringLengthExpression:``, which points to a ``DIExpression`` which
  computes the length in bits.
- ``size``, which contains the literal length in bits.

The ``stringLocationExpression:`` points to a ``DIExpression`` which describes
the "data location" of the string object, if present.

'``tbaa``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In LLVM IR, memory does not have types, so LLVM's own type system is not
suitable for doing type based alias analysis (TBAA). Instead, metadata is
added to the IR to describe a type system of a higher level language. This
can be used to implement C/C++ strict type aliasing rules, but it can also
be used to implement custom alias analysis behavior for other languages.

This description of LLVM's TBAA system is broken into two parts:
:ref:`Semantics<tbaa_node_semantics>` talks about high level issues, and
:ref:`Representation<tbaa_node_representation>` talks about the metadata
encoding of various entities.

It is always possible to trace any TBAA node to a "root" TBAA node (details
in the :ref:`Representation<tbaa_node_representation>` section).  TBAA
nodes with different roots have an unknown aliasing relationship, and LLVM
conservatively infers ``MayAlias`` between them.  The rules mentioned in
this section only pertain to TBAA nodes living under the same root.

.. _tbaa_node_semantics:

Semantics
"""""""""

The TBAA metadata system, referred to as "struct path TBAA" (not to be
confused with ``tbaa.struct``), consists of the following high level
concepts: *Type Descriptors*, further subdivided into scalar type
descriptors and struct type descriptors; and *Access Tags*.

**Type descriptors** describe the type system of the higher level language
being compiled.  **Scalar type descriptors** describe types that do not
contain other types.  Each scalar type has a parent type, which must also
be a scalar type or the TBAA root.  Via this parent relation, scalar types
within a TBAA root form a tree.  **Struct type descriptors** denote types
that contain a sequence of other type descriptors, at known offsets.  These
contained type descriptors can either be struct type descriptors themselves
or scalar type descriptors.

**Access tags** are metadata nodes attached to load and store instructions.
Access tags use type descriptors to describe the *location* being accessed
in terms of the type system of the higher level language.  Access tags are
tuples consisting of a base type, an access type and an offset.  The base
type is a scalar type descriptor or a struct type descriptor, the access
type is a scalar type descriptor, and the offset is a constant integer.

The access tag ``(BaseTy, AccessTy, Offset)`` can describe one of two
things:

 * If ``BaseTy`` is a struct type, the tag describes a memory access (load
   or store) of a value of type ``AccessTy`` contained in the struct type
   ``BaseTy`` at offset ``Offset``.

 * If ``BaseTy`` is a scalar type, ``Offset`` must be 0 and ``BaseTy`` and
   ``AccessTy`` must be the same; and the access tag describes a scalar
   access with scalar type ``AccessTy``.

We first define an ``ImmediateParent`` relation on ``(BaseTy, Offset)``
tuples this way:

 * If ``BaseTy`` is a scalar type then ``ImmediateParent(BaseTy, 0)`` is
   ``(ParentTy, 0)`` where ``ParentTy`` is the parent of the scalar type as
   described in the TBAA metadata.  ``ImmediateParent(BaseTy, Offset)`` is
   undefined if ``Offset`` is non-zero.

 * If ``BaseTy`` is a struct type then ``ImmediateParent(BaseTy, Offset)``
   is ``(NewTy, NewOffset)`` where ``NewTy`` is the type contained in
   ``BaseTy`` at offset ``Offset`` and ``NewOffset`` is ``Offset`` adjusted
   to be relative within that inner type.

A memory access with an access tag ``(BaseTy1, AccessTy1, Offset1)``
aliases a memory access with an access tag ``(BaseTy2, AccessTy2,
Offset2)`` if either ``(BaseTy1, Offset1)`` is reachable from ``(Base2,
Offset2)`` via the ``Parent`` relation or vice versa.

As a concrete example, the type descriptor graph for the following program

.. code-block:: c

    struct Inner {
      int i;    // offset 0
      float f;  // offset 4
    };

    struct Outer {
      float f;  // offset 0
      double d; // offset 4
      struct Inner inner_a;  // offset 12
    };

    void f(struct Outer* outer, struct Inner* inner, float* f, int* i, char* c) {
      outer->f = 0;            // tag0: (OuterStructTy, FloatScalarTy, 0)
      outer->inner_a.i = 0;    // tag1: (OuterStructTy, IntScalarTy, 12)
      outer->inner_a.f = 0.0;  // tag2: (OuterStructTy, FloatScalarTy, 16)
      *f = 0.0;                // tag3: (FloatScalarTy, FloatScalarTy, 0)
    }

is (note that in C and C++, ``char`` can be used to access any arbitrary
type):

.. code-block:: text

    Root = "TBAA Root"
    CharScalarTy = ("char", Root, 0)
    FloatScalarTy = ("float", CharScalarTy, 0)
    DoubleScalarTy = ("double", CharScalarTy, 0)
    IntScalarTy = ("int", CharScalarTy, 0)
    InnerStructTy = {"Inner" (IntScalarTy, 0), (FloatScalarTy, 4)}
    OuterStructTy = {"Outer", (FloatScalarTy, 0), (DoubleScalarTy, 4),
                     (InnerStructTy, 12)}


with (e.g.) ``ImmediateParent(OuterStructTy, 12)`` = ``(InnerStructTy,
0)``, ``ImmediateParent(InnerStructTy, 0)`` = ``(IntScalarTy, 0)``, and
``ImmediateParent(IntScalarTy, 0)`` = ``(CharScalarTy, 0)``.

.. _tbaa_node_representation:

Representation
""""""""""""""

The root node of a TBAA type hierarchy is an ``MDNode`` with 0 operands or
with exactly one ``MDString`` operand.

Scalar type descriptors are represented as an ``MDNode`` s with two
operands.  The first operand is an ``MDString`` denoting the name of the
struct type.  LLVM does not assign meaning to the value of this operand, it
only cares about it being an ``MDString``.  The second operand is an
``MDNode`` which points to the parent for said scalar type descriptor,
which is either another scalar type descriptor or the TBAA root.  Scalar
type descriptors can have an optional third argument, but that must be the
constant integer zero.

Struct type descriptors are represented as ``MDNode`` s with an odd number
of operands greater than 1.  The first operand is an ``MDString`` denoting
the name of the struct type.  Like in scalar type descriptors the actual
value of this name operand is irrelevant to LLVM.  After the name operand,
the struct type descriptors have a sequence of alternating ``MDNode`` and
``ConstantInt`` operands.  With N starting from 1, the 2N - 1 th operand,
an ``MDNode``, denotes a contained field, and the 2N th operand, a
``ConstantInt``, is the offset of the said contained field.  The offsets
must be in non-decreasing order.

Access tags are represented as ``MDNode`` s with either 3 or 4 operands.
The first operand is an ``MDNode`` pointing to the node representing the
base type.  The second operand is an ``MDNode`` pointing to the node
representing the access type.  The third operand is a ``ConstantInt`` that
states the offset of the access.  If a fourth field is present, it must be
a ``ConstantInt`` valued at 0 or 1.  If it is 1 then the access tag states
that the location being accessed is "constant" (meaning
``pointsToConstantMemory`` should return true; see `other useful
AliasAnalysis methods <AliasAnalysis.html#OtherItfs>`_).  The TBAA root of
the access type and the base type of an access tag must be the same, and
that is the TBAA root of the access tag.

'``tbaa.struct``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :ref:`llvm.memcpy <int_memcpy>` is often used to implement
aggregate assignment operations in C and similar languages, however it
is defined to copy a contiguous region of memory, which is more than
strictly necessary for aggregate types which contain holes due to
padding. Also, it doesn't contain any TBAA information about the fields
of the aggregate.

``!tbaa.struct`` metadata can describe which memory subregions in a
memcpy are padding and what the TBAA tags of the struct are.

The current metadata format is very simple. ``!tbaa.struct`` metadata
nodes are a list of operands which are in conceptual groups of three.
For each group of three, the first operand gives the byte offset of a
field in bytes, the second gives its size in bytes, and the third gives
its tbaa tag. e.g.:

.. code-block:: llvm

    !4 = !{ i64 0, i64 4, !1, i64 8, i64 4, !2 }

This describes a struct with two fields. The first is at offset 0 bytes
with size 4 bytes, and has tbaa tag !1. The second is at offset 8 bytes
and has size 4 bytes and has tbaa tag !2.

Note that the fields need not be contiguous. In this example, there is a
4 byte gap between the two fields. This gap represents padding which
does not carry useful data and need not be preserved.

'``noalias``' and '``alias.scope``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``noalias`` and ``alias.scope`` metadata provide the ability to specify generic
noalias memory-access sets. This means that some collection of memory access
instructions (loads, stores, memory-accessing calls, etc.) that carry
``noalias`` metadata can specifically be specified not to alias with some other
collection of memory access instructions that carry ``alias.scope`` metadata.
Each type of metadata specifies a list of scopes where each scope has an id and
a domain.

When evaluating an aliasing query, if for some domain, the set
of scopes with that domain in one instruction's ``alias.scope`` list is a
subset of (or equal to) the set of scopes for that domain in another
instruction's ``noalias`` list, then the two memory accesses are assumed not to
alias.

Because scopes in one domain don't affect scopes in other domains, separate
domains can be used to compose multiple independent noalias sets.  This is
used for example during inlining.  As the noalias function parameters are
turned into noalias scope metadata, a new domain is used every time the
function is inlined.

The metadata identifying each domain is itself a list containing one or two
entries. The first entry is the name of the domain. Note that if the name is a
string then it can be combined across functions and translation units. A
self-reference can be used to create globally unique domain names. A
descriptive string may optionally be provided as a second list entry.

The metadata identifying each scope is also itself a list containing two or
three entries. The first entry is the name of the scope. Note that if the name
is a string then it can be combined across functions and translation units. A
self-reference can be used to create globally unique scope names. A metadata
reference to the scope's domain is the second entry. A descriptive string may
optionally be provided as a third list entry.

For example,

.. code-block:: llvm

    ; Two scope domains:
    !0 = !{!0}
    !1 = !{!1}

    ; Some scopes in these domains:
    !2 = !{!2, !0}
    !3 = !{!3, !0}
    !4 = !{!4, !1}

    ; Some scope lists:
    !5 = !{!4} ; A list containing only scope !4
    !6 = !{!4, !3, !2}
    !7 = !{!3}

    ; These two instructions don't alias:
    %0 = load float, ptr %c, align 4, !alias.scope !5
    store float %0, ptr %arrayidx.i, align 4, !noalias !5

    ; These two instructions also don't alias (for domain !1, the set of scopes
    ; in the !alias.scope equals that in the !noalias list):
    %2 = load float, ptr %c, align 4, !alias.scope !5
    store float %2, ptr %arrayidx.i2, align 4, !noalias !6

    ; These two instructions may alias (for domain !0, the set of scopes in
    ; the !noalias list is not a superset of, or equal to, the scopes in the
    ; !alias.scope list):
    %2 = load float, ptr %c, align 4, !alias.scope !6
    store float %0, ptr %arrayidx.i, align 4, !noalias !7

'``fpmath``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``fpmath`` metadata may be attached to any instruction of floating-point
type. It can be used to express the maximum acceptable error in the
result of that instruction, in ULPs, thus potentially allowing the
compiler to use a more efficient but less accurate method of computing
it. ULP is defined as follows:

    If ``x`` is a real number that lies between two finite consecutive
    floating-point numbers ``a`` and ``b``, without being equal to one
    of them, then ``ulp(x) = |b - a|``, otherwise ``ulp(x)`` is the
    distance between the two non-equal finite floating-point numbers
    nearest ``x``. Moreover, ``ulp(NaN)`` is ``NaN``.

The metadata node shall consist of a single positive float type number
representing the maximum relative error, for example:

.. code-block:: llvm

    !0 = !{ float 2.5 } ; maximum acceptable inaccuracy is 2.5 ULPs

.. _range-metadata:

'``range``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``range`` metadata may be attached only to ``load``, ``call`` and ``invoke`` of
integer or vector of integer types. It expresses the possible ranges the loaded
value or the value returned by the called function at this call site is in. If
the loaded or returned value is not in the specified range, a poison value is
returned instead. The ranges are represented with a flattened list of integers.
The loaded value or the value returned is known to be in the union of the ranges
defined by each consecutive pair. Each pair has the following properties:

-  The type must match the scalar type of the instruction.
-  The pair ``a,b`` represents the range ``[a,b)``.
-  Both ``a`` and ``b`` are constants.
-  The range is allowed to wrap.
-  The range should not represent the full or empty set. That is,
   ``a!=b``.

In addition, the pairs must be in signed order of the lower bound and
they must be non-contiguous.

For vector-typed instructions, the range is applied element-wise.

Examples:

.. code-block:: llvm

      %a = load i8, ptr %x, align 1, !range !0 ; Can only be 0 or 1
      %b = load i8, ptr %y, align 1, !range !1 ; Can only be 255 (-1), 0 or 1
      %c = call i8 @foo(),       !range !2 ; Can only be 0, 1, 3, 4 or 5
      %d = invoke i8 @bar() to label %cont
             unwind label %lpad, !range !3 ; Can only be -2, -1, 3, 4 or 5
      %e = load <2 x i8>, ptr %x, !range 0 ; Can only be <0 or 1, 0 or 1>
    ...
    !0 = !{ i8 0, i8 2 }
    !1 = !{ i8 255, i8 2 }
    !2 = !{ i8 0, i8 2, i8 3, i8 6 }
    !3 = !{ i8 -2, i8 0, i8 3, i8 6 }

'``absolute_symbol``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``absolute_symbol`` metadata may be attached to a global variable
declaration. It marks the declaration as a reference to an absolute symbol,
which causes the backend to use absolute relocations for the symbol even
in position independent code, and expresses the possible ranges that the
global variable's *address* (not its value) is in, in the same format as
``range`` metadata, with the extension that the pair ``all-ones,all-ones``
may be used to represent the full set.

Example (assuming 64-bit pointers):

.. code-block:: llvm

      @a = external global i8, !absolute_symbol !0 ; Absolute symbol in range [0,256)
      @b = external global i8, !absolute_symbol !1 ; Absolute symbol in range [0,2^64)

    ...
    !0 = !{ i64 0, i64 256 }
    !1 = !{ i64 -1, i64 -1 }

'``callees``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``callees`` metadata may be attached to indirect call sites. If ``callees``
metadata is attached to a call site, and any callee is not among the set of
functions provided by the metadata, the behavior is undefined. The intent of
this metadata is to facilitate optimizations such as indirect-call promotion.
For example, in the code below, the call instruction may only target the
``add`` or ``sub`` functions:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %result = call i64 %binop(i64 %x, i64 %y), !callees !0

    ...
    !0 = !{ptr @add, ptr @sub}

'``callback``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``callback`` metadata may be attached to a function declaration, or definition.
(Call sites are excluded only due to the lack of a use case.) For ease of
exposition, we'll refer to the function annotated w/ metadata as a broker
function. The metadata describes how the arguments of a call to the broker are
in turn passed to the callback function specified by the metadata. Thus, the
``callback`` metadata provides a partial description of a call site inside the
broker function with regards to the arguments of a call to the broker. The only
semantic restriction on the broker function itself is that it is not allowed to
inspect or modify arguments referenced in the ``callback`` metadata as
pass-through to the callback function.

The broker is not required to actually invoke the callback function at runtime.
However, the assumptions about not inspecting or modifying arguments that would
be passed to the specified callback function still hold, even if the callback
function is not dynamically invoked. The broker is allowed to invoke the
callback function more than once per invocation of the broker. The broker is
also allowed to invoke (directly or indirectly) the function passed as a
callback through another use. Finally, the broker is also allowed to relay the
callback callee invocation to a different thread.

The metadata is structured as follows: At the outer level, ``callback``
metadata is a list of ``callback`` encodings. Each encoding starts with a
constant ``i64`` which describes the argument position of the callback function
in the call to the broker. The following elements, except the last, describe
what arguments are passed to the callback function. Each element is again an
``i64`` constant identifying the argument of the broker that is passed through,
or ``i64 -1`` to indicate an unknown or inspected argument. The order in which
they are listed has to be the same in which they are passed to the callback
callee. The last element of the encoding is a boolean which specifies how
variadic arguments of the broker are handled. If it is true, all variadic
arguments of the broker are passed through to the callback function *after* the
arguments encoded explicitly before.

In the code below, the ``pthread_create`` function is marked as a broker
through the ``!callback !1`` metadata. In the example, there is only one
callback encoding, namely ``!2``, associated with the broker. This encoding
identifies the callback function as the second argument of the broker (``i64
2``) and the sole argument of the callback function as the third one of the
broker function (``i64 3``).

.. FIXME why does the llvm-sphinx-docs builder give a highlighting
   error if the below is set to highlight as 'llvm', despite that we
   have misc.highlighting_failure set?

.. code-block:: text

    declare !callback !1 dso_local i32 @pthread_create(ptr, ptr, ptr, ptr)

    ...
    !2 = !{i64 2, i64 3, i1 false}
    !1 = !{!2}

Another example is shown below. The callback callee is the second argument of
the ``__kmpc_fork_call`` function (``i64 2``). The callee is given two unknown
values (each identified by a ``i64 -1``) and afterwards all
variadic arguments that are passed to the ``__kmpc_fork_call`` call (due to the
final ``i1 true``).

.. FIXME why does the llvm-sphinx-docs builder give a highlighting
   error if the below is set to highlight as 'llvm', despite that we
   have misc.highlighting_failure set?

.. code-block:: text

    declare !callback !0 dso_local void @__kmpc_fork_call(ptr, i32, ptr, ...)

    ...
    !1 = !{i64 2, i64 -1, i64 -1, i1 true}
    !0 = !{!1}

'``exclude``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``exclude`` metadata may be attached to a global variable to signify that its
section should not be included in the final executable or shared library. This
option is only valid for global variables with an explicit section targeting ELF
or COFF. This is done using the ``SHF_EXCLUDE`` flag on ELF targets and the
``IMAGE_SCN_LNK_REMOVE`` and ``IMAGE_SCN_MEM_DISCARDABLE`` flags for COFF
targets. Additionally, this metadata is only used as a flag, so the associated
node must be empty. The explicit section should not conflict with any other
sections that the user does not want removed after linking.

.. code-block:: text

  @object = private constant [1 x i8] c"\00", section ".foo" !exclude !0

  ...
  !0 = !{}

'``unpredictable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``unpredictable`` metadata may be attached to any branch or switch
instruction. It can be used to express the unpredictability of control
flow. Similar to the llvm.expect intrinsic, it may be used to alter
optimizations related to compare and branch instructions. The metadata
is treated as a boolean value; if it exists, it signals that the branch
or switch that it is attached to is completely unpredictable.

.. _md_dereferenceable:

'``dereferenceable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The existence of the ``!dereferenceable`` metadata on the instruction
tells the optimizer that the value loaded is known to be dereferenceable,
otherwise the behavior is undefined.
The number of bytes known to be dereferenceable is specified by the integer
value in the metadata node. This is analogous to the ''dereferenceable''
attribute on parameters and return values.

.. _md_dereferenceable_or_null:

'``dereferenceable_or_null``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The existence of the ``!dereferenceable_or_null`` metadata on the
instruction tells the optimizer that the value loaded is known to be either
dereferenceable or null, otherwise the behavior is undefined.
The number of bytes known to be dereferenceable is specified by the integer
value in the metadata node. This is analogous to the ''dereferenceable_or_null''
attribute on parameters and return values.

.. _llvm.loop:

'``llvm.loop``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is sometimes useful to attach information to loop constructs. Currently,
loop metadata is implemented as metadata attached to the branch instruction
in the loop latch block. The loop metadata node is a list of
other metadata nodes, each representing a property of the loop. Usually,
the first item of the property node is a string. For example, the
``llvm.loop.unroll.count`` suggests an unroll factor to the loop
unroller:

.. code-block:: llvm

      br i1 %exitcond, label %._crit_edge, label %.lr.ph, !llvm.loop !0
    ...
    !0 = !{!0, !1, !2}
    !1 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll.enable"}
    !2 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll.count", i32 4}

For legacy reasons, the first item of a loop metadata node must be a
reference to itself. Before the advent of the 'distinct' keyword, this
forced the preservation of otherwise identical metadata nodes. Since
the loop-metadata node can be attached to multiple nodes, the 'distinct'
keyword has become unnecessary.

Prior to the property nodes, one or two ``DILocation`` (debug location)
nodes can be present in the list. The first, if present, identifies the
source-code location where the loop begins. The second, if present,
identifies the source-code location where the loop ends.

Loop metadata nodes cannot be used as unique identifiers. They are
neither persistent for the same loop through transformations nor
necessarily unique to just one loop.

'``llvm.loop.disable_nonforced``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata disables all optional loop transformations unless
explicitly instructed using other transformation metadata such as
``llvm.loop.unroll.enable``. That is, no heuristic will try to determine
whether a transformation is profitable. The purpose is to avoid that the
loop is transformed to a different loop before an explicitly requested
(forced) transformation is applied. For instance, loop fusion can make
other transformations impossible. Mandatory loop canonicalizations such
as loop rotation are still applied.

It is recommended to use this metadata in addition to any llvm.loop.*
transformation directive. Also, any loop should have at most one
directive applied to it (and a sequence of transformations built using
followup-attributes). Otherwise, which transformation will be applied
depends on implementation details such as the pass pipeline order.

See :ref:`transformation-metadata` for details.

'``llvm.loop.vectorize``' and '``llvm.loop.interleave``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Metadata prefixed with ``llvm.loop.vectorize`` or ``llvm.loop.interleave`` are
used to control per-loop vectorization and interleaving parameters such as
vectorization width and interleave count. These metadata should be used in
conjunction with ``llvm.loop`` loop identification metadata. The
``llvm.loop.vectorize`` and ``llvm.loop.interleave`` metadata are only
optimization hints and the optimizer will only interleave and vectorize loops if
it believes it is safe to do so. The ``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses`` metadata
which contains information about loop-carried memory dependencies can be helpful
in determining the safety of these transformations.

'``llvm.loop.interleave.count``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata suggests an interleave count to the loop interleaver.
The first operand is the string ``llvm.loop.interleave.count`` and the
second operand is an integer specifying the interleave count. For
example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.interleave.count", i32 4}

Note that setting ``llvm.loop.interleave.count`` to 1 disables interleaving
multiple iterations of the loop. If ``llvm.loop.interleave.count`` is set to 0
then the interleave count will be determined automatically.

'``llvm.loop.vectorize.enable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata selectively enables or disables vectorization for the loop. The
first operand is the string ``llvm.loop.vectorize.enable`` and the second operand
is a bit. If the bit operand value is 1 vectorization is enabled. A value of
0 disables vectorization:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.vectorize.enable", i1 0}
   !1 = !{!"llvm.loop.vectorize.enable", i1 1}

'``llvm.loop.vectorize.predicate.enable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata selectively enables or disables creating predicated instructions
for the loop, which can enable folding of the scalar epilogue loop into the
main loop. The first operand is the string
``llvm.loop.vectorize.predicate.enable`` and the second operand is a bit. If
the bit operand value is 1 vectorization is enabled. A value of 0 disables
vectorization:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.vectorize.predicate.enable", i1 0}
   !1 = !{!"llvm.loop.vectorize.predicate.enable", i1 1}

'``llvm.loop.vectorize.scalable.enable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata selectively enables or disables scalable vectorization for the
loop, and only has any effect if vectorization for the loop is already enabled.
The first operand is the string ``llvm.loop.vectorize.scalable.enable``
and the second operand is a bit. If the bit operand value is 1 scalable
vectorization is enabled, whereas a value of 0 reverts to the default fixed
width vectorization:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.vectorize.scalable.enable", i1 0}
   !1 = !{!"llvm.loop.vectorize.scalable.enable", i1 1}

'``llvm.loop.vectorize.width``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata sets the target width of the vectorizer. The first
operand is the string ``llvm.loop.vectorize.width`` and the second
operand is an integer specifying the width. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.vectorize.width", i32 4}

Note that setting ``llvm.loop.vectorize.width`` to 1 disables
vectorization of the loop. If ``llvm.loop.vectorize.width`` is set to
0 or if the loop does not have this metadata the width will be
determined automatically.

'``llvm.loop.vectorize.followup_vectorized``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which loop attributes the vectorized loop will
have. See :ref:`transformation-metadata` for details.

'``llvm.loop.vectorize.followup_epilogue``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which loop attributes the epilogue will have. The
epilogue is not vectorized and is executed when either the vectorized
loop is not known to preserve semantics (because e.g., it processes two
arrays that are found to alias by a runtime check) or for the last
iterations that do not fill a complete set of vector lanes. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.vectorize.followup_all``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Attributes in the metadata will be added to both the vectorized and
epilogue loop.
See :ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.unroll``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Metadata prefixed with ``llvm.loop.unroll`` are loop unrolling
optimization hints such as the unroll factor. ``llvm.loop.unroll``
metadata should be used in conjunction with ``llvm.loop`` loop
identification metadata. The ``llvm.loop.unroll`` metadata are only
optimization hints and the unrolling will only be performed if the
optimizer believes it is safe to do so.

'``llvm.loop.unroll.count``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata suggests an unroll factor to the loop unroller. The
first operand is the string ``llvm.loop.unroll.count`` and the second
operand is a positive integer specifying the unroll factor. For
example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll.count", i32 4}

If the trip count of the loop is less than the unroll count the loop
will be partially unrolled.

'``llvm.loop.unroll.disable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata disables loop unrolling. The metadata has a single operand
which is the string ``llvm.loop.unroll.disable``. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll.disable"}

'``llvm.loop.unroll.runtime.disable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata disables runtime loop unrolling. The metadata has a single
operand which is the string ``llvm.loop.unroll.runtime.disable``. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll.runtime.disable"}

'``llvm.loop.unroll.enable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata suggests that the loop should be fully unrolled if the trip count
is known at compile time and partially unrolled if the trip count is not known
at compile time. The metadata has a single operand which is the string
``llvm.loop.unroll.enable``.  For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll.enable"}

'``llvm.loop.unroll.full``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata suggests that the loop should be unrolled fully. The
metadata has a single operand which is the string ``llvm.loop.unroll.full``.
For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll.full"}

'``llvm.loop.unroll.followup``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which loop attributes the unrolled loop will have.
See :ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.unroll.followup_remainder``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which loop attributes the remainder loop after
partial/runtime unrolling will have. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata is treated very similarly to the ``llvm.loop.unroll`` metadata
above, but affect the unroll and jam pass. In addition any loop with
``llvm.loop.unroll`` metadata but no ``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam`` metadata will
disable unroll and jam (so ``llvm.loop.unroll`` metadata will be left to the
unroller, plus ``llvm.loop.unroll.disable`` metadata will disable unroll and jam
too.)

The metadata for unroll and jam otherwise is the same as for ``unroll``.
``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.enable``, ``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.disable`` and
``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.count`` do the same as for unroll.
``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.full`` is not supported. Again these are only hints
and the normal safety checks will still be performed.

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.count``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata suggests an unroll and jam factor to use, similarly to
``llvm.loop.unroll.count``. The first operand is the string
``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.count`` and the second operand is a positive integer
specifying the unroll factor. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.count", i32 4}

If the trip count of the loop is less than the unroll count the loop
will be partially unroll and jammed.

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.disable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata disables loop unroll and jamming. The metadata has a single
operand which is the string ``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.disable``. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.disable"}

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.enable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata suggests that the loop should be fully unroll and jammed if the
trip count is known at compile time and partially unrolled if the trip count is
not known at compile time. The metadata has a single operand which is the
string ``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.enable``.  For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.enable"}

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.followup_outer``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which loop attributes the outer unrolled loop will
have. See :ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for
details.

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.followup_inner``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which loop attributes the inner jammed loop will
have. See :ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for
details.

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.followup_remainder_outer``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which attributes the epilogue of the outer loop
will have. This loop is usually unrolled, meaning there is no such
loop. This attribute will be ignored in this case. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.followup_remainder_inner``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which attributes the inner loop of the epilogue
will have. The outer epilogue will usually be unrolled, meaning there
can be multiple inner remainder loops. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.followup_all``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Attributes specified in the metadata is added to all
``llvm.loop.unroll_and_jam.*`` loops. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.licm_versioning.disable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata indicates that the loop should not be versioned for the purpose
of enabling loop-invariant code motion (LICM). The metadata has a single operand
which is the string ``llvm.loop.licm_versioning.disable``. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.licm_versioning.disable"}

'``llvm.loop.distribute.enable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Loop distribution allows splitting a loop into multiple loops.  Currently,
this is only performed if the entire loop cannot be vectorized due to unsafe
memory dependencies.  The transformation will attempt to isolate the unsafe
dependencies into their own loop.

This metadata can be used to selectively enable or disable distribution of the
loop.  The first operand is the string ``llvm.loop.distribute.enable`` and the
second operand is a bit. If the bit operand value is 1 distribution is
enabled. A value of 0 disables distribution:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.loop.distribute.enable", i1 0}
   !1 = !{!"llvm.loop.distribute.enable", i1 1}

This metadata should be used in conjunction with ``llvm.loop`` loop
identification metadata.

'``llvm.loop.distribute.followup_coincident``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which attributes extracted loops with no cyclic
dependencies will have (i.e. can be vectorized). See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.distribute.followup_sequential``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata defines which attributes the isolated loops with unsafe
memory dependencies will have. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.distribute.followup_fallback``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If loop versioning is necessary, this metadata defined the attributes
the non-distributed fallback version will have. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.loop.distribute.followup_all``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The attributes in this metadata is added to all followup loops of the
loop distribution pass. See
:ref:`Transformation Metadata <transformation-metadata>` for details.

'``llvm.licm.disable``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This metadata indicates that loop-invariant code motion (LICM) should not be
performed on this loop. The metadata has a single operand which is the string
``llvm.licm.disable``. For example:

.. code-block:: llvm

   !0 = !{!"llvm.licm.disable"}

Note that although it operates per loop it isn't given the llvm.loop prefix
as it is not affected by the ``llvm.loop.disable_nonforced`` metadata.

'``llvm.access.group``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``llvm.access.group`` metadata can be attached to any instruction that
potentially accesses memory. It can point to a single distinct metadata
node, which we call access group. This node represents all memory access
instructions referring to it via ``llvm.access.group``. When an
instruction belongs to multiple access groups, it can also point to a
list of accesses groups, illustrated by the following example.

.. code-block:: llvm

   %val = load i32, ptr %arrayidx, !llvm.access.group !0
   ...
   !0 = !{!1, !2}
   !1 = distinct !{}
   !2 = distinct !{}

It is illegal for the list node to be empty since it might be confused
with an access group.

The access group metadata node must be 'distinct' to avoid collapsing
multiple access groups by content. An access group metadata node must
always be empty which can be used to distinguish an access group
metadata node from a list of access groups. Being empty avoids the
situation that the content must be updated which, because metadata is
immutable by design, would required finding and updating all references
to the access group node.

The access group can be used to refer to a memory access instruction
without pointing to it directly (which is not possible in global
metadata). Currently, the only metadata making use of it is
``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses``.

'``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses`` metadata refers to one or more
access group metadata nodes (see ``llvm.access.group``). It denotes that
no loop-carried memory dependence exist between it and other instructions
in the loop with this metadata.

Let ``m1`` and ``m2`` be two instructions that both have the
``llvm.access.group`` metadata to the access group ``g1``, respectively
``g2`` (which might be identical). If a loop contains both access groups
in its ``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses`` metadata, then the compiler can
assume that there is no dependency between ``m1`` and ``m2`` carried by
this loop. Instructions that belong to multiple access groups are
considered having this property if at least one of the access groups
matches the ``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses`` list.

If all memory-accessing instructions in a loop have
``llvm.access.group`` metadata that each refer to one of the access
groups of a loop's ``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses`` metadata, then the
loop has no loop carried memory dependencies and is considered to be a
parallel loop.

Note that if not all memory access instructions belong to an access
group referred to by ``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses``, then the loop must
not be considered trivially parallel. Additional
memory dependence analysis is required to make that determination. As a fail
safe mechanism, this causes loops that were originally parallel to be considered
sequential (if optimization passes that are unaware of the parallel semantics
insert new memory instructions into the loop body).

Example of a loop that is considered parallel due to its correct use of
both ``llvm.access.group`` and ``llvm.loop.parallel_accesses``
metadata types.

.. code-block:: llvm

   for.body:
     ...
     %val0 = load i32, ptr %arrayidx, !llvm.access.group !1
     ...
     store i32 %val0, ptr %arrayidx1, !llvm.access.group !1
     ...
     br i1 %exitcond, label %for.end, label %for.body, !llvm.loop !0

   for.end:
   ...
   !0 = distinct !{!0, !{!"llvm.loop.parallel_accesses", !1}}
   !1 = distinct !{}

It is also possible to have nested parallel loops:

.. code-block:: llvm

   outer.for.body:
     ...
     %val1 = load i32, ptr %arrayidx3, !llvm.access.group !4
     ...
     br label %inner.for.body

   inner.for.body:
     ...
     %val0 = load i32, ptr %arrayidx1, !llvm.access.group !3
     ...
     store i32 %val0, ptr %arrayidx2, !llvm.access.group !3
     ...
     br i1 %exitcond, label %inner.for.end, label %inner.for.body, !llvm.loop !1

   inner.for.end:
     ...
     store i32 %val1, ptr %arrayidx4, !llvm.access.group !4
     ...
     br i1 %exitcond, label %outer.for.end, label %outer.for.body, !llvm.loop !2

   outer.for.end:                                          ; preds = %for.body
   ...
   !1 = distinct !{!1, !{!"llvm.loop.parallel_accesses", !3}}     ; metadata for the inner loop
   !2 = distinct !{!2, !{!"llvm.loop.parallel_accesses", !3, !4}} ; metadata for the outer loop
   !3 = distinct !{} ; access group for instructions in the inner loop (which are implicitly contained in outer loop as well)
   !4 = distinct !{} ; access group for instructions in the outer, but not the inner loop

.. _langref_llvm_loop_mustprogress:

'``llvm.loop.mustprogress``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``llvm.loop.mustprogress`` metadata indicates that this loop is required to
terminate, unwind, or interact with the environment in an observable way e.g.
via a volatile memory access, I/O, or other synchronization. If such a loop is
not found to interact with the environment in an observable way, the loop may
be removed. This corresponds to the ``mustprogress`` function attribute.

'``irr_loop``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``irr_loop`` metadata may be attached to the terminator instruction of a basic
block that's an irreducible loop header (note that an irreducible loop has more
than once header basic blocks.) If ``irr_loop`` metadata is attached to the
terminator instruction of a basic block that is not really an irreducible loop
header, the behavior is undefined. The intent of this metadata is to improve the
accuracy of the block frequency propagation. For example, in the code below, the
block ``header0`` may have a loop header weight (relative to the other headers of
the irreducible loop) of 100:

.. code-block:: llvm

    header0:
    ...
    br i1 %cmp, label %t1, label %t2, !irr_loop !0

    ...
    !0 = !{"loop_header_weight", i64 100}

Irreducible loop header weights are typically based on profile data.

.. _md_invariant.group:

'``invariant.group``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The experimental ``invariant.group`` metadata may be attached to
``load``/``store`` instructions referencing a single metadata with no entries.
The existence of the ``invariant.group`` metadata on the instruction tells
the optimizer that every ``load`` and ``store`` to the same pointer operand
can be assumed to load or store the same
value (but see the ``llvm.launder.invariant.group`` intrinsic which affects
when two pointers are considered the same). Pointers returned by bitcast or
getelementptr with only zero indices are considered the same.

Examples:

.. code-block:: llvm

   @unknownPtr = external global i8
   ...
   %ptr = alloca i8
   store i8 42, ptr %ptr, !invariant.group !0
   call void @foo(ptr %ptr)

   %a = load i8, ptr %ptr, !invariant.group !0 ; Can assume that value under %ptr didn't change
   call void @foo(ptr %ptr)

   %newPtr = call ptr @getPointer(ptr %ptr)
   %c = load i8, ptr %newPtr, !invariant.group !0 ; Can't assume anything, because we only have information about %ptr

   %unknownValue = load i8, ptr @unknownPtr
   store i8 %unknownValue, ptr %ptr, !invariant.group !0 ; Can assume that %unknownValue == 42

   call void @foo(ptr %ptr)
   %newPtr2 = call ptr @llvm.launder.invariant.group.p0(ptr %ptr)
   %d = load i8, ptr %newPtr2, !invariant.group !0  ; Can't step through launder.invariant.group to get value of %ptr

   ...
   declare void @foo(ptr)
   declare ptr @getPointer(ptr)
   declare ptr @llvm.launder.invariant.group.p0(ptr)

   !0 = !{}

The invariant.group metadata must be dropped when replacing one pointer by
another based on aliasing information. This is because invariant.group is tied
to the SSA value of the pointer operand.

.. code-block:: llvm

  %v = load i8, ptr %x, !invariant.group !0
  ; if %x mustalias %y then we can replace the above instruction with
  %v = load i8, ptr %y

Note that this is an experimental feature, which means that its semantics might
change in the future.

'``type``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See :doc:`TypeMetadata`.

'``associated``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``associated`` metadata may be attached to a global variable definition with
a single argument that references a global object (optionally through an alias).

This metadata lowers to the ELF section flag ``SHF_LINK_ORDER`` which prevents
discarding of the global variable in linker GC unless the referenced object is
also discarded. The linker support for this feature is spotty. For best
compatibility, globals carrying this metadata should:

- Be in ``@llvm.compiler.used``.
- If the referenced global variable is in a comdat, be in the same comdat.

``!associated`` can not express many-to-one relationship. A global variable with
the metadata should generally not be referenced by a function: the function may
be inlined into other functions, leading to more references to the metadata.
Ideally we would want to keep metadata alive as long as any inline location is
alive, but this many-to-one relationship is not representable. Moreover, if the
metadata is retained while the function is discarded, the linker will report an
error of a relocation referencing a discarded section.

The metadata is often used with an explicit section consisting of valid C
identifiers so that the runtime can find the metadata section with
linker-defined encapsulation symbols ``__start_<section_name>`` and
``__stop_<section_name>``.

It does not have any effect on non-ELF targets.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    $a = comdat any
    @a = global i32 1, comdat $a
    @b = internal global i32 2, comdat $a, section "abc", !associated !0
    !0 = !{ptr @a}


'``prof``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``prof`` metadata is used to record profile data in the IR.
The first operand of the metadata node indicates the profile metadata
type. There are currently 3 types:
:ref:`branch_weights<prof_node_branch_weights>`,
:ref:`function_entry_count<prof_node_function_entry_count>`, and
:ref:`VP<prof_node_VP>`.

.. _prof_node_branch_weights:

branch_weights
""""""""""""""

Branch weight metadata attached to a branch, select, switch or call instruction
represents the likeliness of the associated branch being taken.
For more information, see :doc:`BranchWeightMetadata`.

.. _prof_node_function_entry_count:

function_entry_count
""""""""""""""""""""

Function entry count metadata can be attached to function definitions
to record the number of times the function is called. Used with BFI
information, it is also used to derive the basic block profile count.
For more information, see :doc:`BranchWeightMetadata`.

.. _prof_node_VP:

VP
""

VP (value profile) metadata can be attached to instructions that have
value profile information. Currently this is indirect calls (where it
records the hottest callees) and calls to memory intrinsics such as memcpy,
memmove, and memset (where it records the hottest byte lengths).

Each VP metadata node contains "VP" string, then a uint32_t value for the value
profiling kind, a uint64_t value for the total number of times the instruction
is executed, followed by uint64_t value and execution count pairs.
The value profiling kind is 0 for indirect call targets and 1 for memory
operations. For indirect call targets, each profile value is a hash
of the callee function name, and for memory operations each value is the
byte length.

Note that the value counts do not need to add up to the total count
listed in the third operand (in practice only the top hottest values
are tracked and reported).

Indirect call example:

.. code-block:: llvm

    call void %f(), !prof !1
    !1 = !{!"VP", i32 0, i64 1600, i64 7651369219802541373, i64 1030, i64 -4377547752858689819, i64 410}

Note that the VP type is 0 (the second operand), which indicates this is
an indirect call value profile data. The third operand indicates that the
indirect call executed 1600 times. The 4th and 6th operands give the
hashes of the 2 hottest target functions' names (this is the same hash used
to represent function names in the profile database), and the 5th and 7th
operands give the execution count that each of the respective prior target
functions was called.

.. _md_annotation:

'``annotation``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``annotation`` metadata can be used to attach a tuple of annotation strings
or a tuple of a tuple of annotation strings to any instruction. This metadata does
not impact the semantics of the program and may only be used to provide additional
insight about the program and transformations to users.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    %a.addr = alloca ptr, align 8, !annotation !0
    !0 = !{!"auto-init"}

Embedding tuple of strings example:

.. code-block:: text

  %a.ptr = getelementptr ptr, ptr %base, i64 0. !annotation !0
  !0 = !{!1}
  !1 = !{!"gep offset", !"0"}

'``func_sanitize``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``func_sanitize`` metadata is used to attach two values for the function
sanitizer instrumentation. The first value is the ubsan function signature.
The second value is the address of the proxy variable which stores the address
of the RTTI descriptor. If :ref:`prologue <prologuedata>` and '``func_sanitize``'
are used at the same time, :ref:`prologue <prologuedata>` is emitted before
'``func_sanitize``' in the output.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    @__llvm_rtti_proxy = private unnamed_addr constant ptr @_ZTIFvvE
    define void @_Z3funv() !func_sanitize !0 {
      return void
    }
    !0 = !{i32 846595819, ptr @__llvm_rtti_proxy}

.. _md_kcfi_type:

'``kcfi_type``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``kcfi_type`` metadata can be used to attach a type identifier to
functions that can be called indirectly. The type data is emitted before the
function entry in the assembly. Indirect calls with the :ref:`kcfi operand
bundle<ob_kcfi>` will emit a check that compares the type identifier to the
metadata.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    define dso_local i32 @f() !kcfi_type !0 {
      ret i32 0
    }
    !0 = !{i32 12345678}

Clang emits ``kcfi_type`` metadata nodes for address-taken functions with
``-fsanitize=kcfi``.

.. _md_memprof:

'``memprof``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``memprof`` metadata is used to record memory profile data on heap
allocation calls. Multiple context-sensitive profiles can be represented
with a single ``memprof`` metadata attachment.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    %call = call ptr @_Znam(i64 10), !memprof !0, !callsite !5
    !0 = !{!1, !3}
    !1 = !{!2, !"cold"}
    !2 = !{i64 4854880825882961848, i64 1905834578520680781}
    !3 = !{!4, !"notcold"}
    !4 = !{i64 4854880825882961848, i64 -6528110295079665978}
    !5 = !{i64 4854880825882961848}

Each operand in the ``memprof`` metadata attachment describes the profiled
behavior of memory allocated by the associated allocation for a given context.
In the above example, there were 2 profiled contexts, one allocating memory
that was typically cold and one allocating memory that was typically not cold.

The format of the metadata describing a context specific profile (e.g.
``!1`` and ``!3`` above) requires a first operand that is a metadata node
describing the context, followed by a list of string metadata tags describing
the profile behavior (e.g. ``cold`` and ``notcold``) above. The metadata nodes
describing the context (e.g. ``!2`` and ``!4`` above) are unique ids
corresponding to callsites, which can be matched to associated IR calls via
:ref:`callsite metadata<md_callsite>`. In practice these ids are formed via
a hash of the callsite's debug info, and the associated call may be in a
different module. The contexts are listed in order from leaf-most call (the
allocation itself) to the outermost callsite context required for uniquely
identifying the described profile behavior (note this may not be the top of
the profiled call stack).

.. _md_callsite:

'``callsite``' Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``callsite`` metadata is used to identify callsites involved in memory
profile contexts described in :ref:`memprof metadata<md_memprof>`.

It is attached both to the profile allocation calls (see the example in
:ref:`memprof metadata<md_memprof>`), as well as to other callsites
in profiled contexts described in heap allocation ``memprof`` metadata.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    %call = call ptr @_Z1Bb(void), !callsite !0
    !0 = !{i64 -6528110295079665978, i64 5462047985461644151}

Each operand in the ``callsite`` metadata attachment is a unique id
corresponding to a callsite (possibly inlined). In practice these ids are
formed via a hash of the callsite's debug info. If the call was not inlined
into any callers it will contain a single operand (id). If it was inlined
it will contain a list of ids, including the ids of the callsites in the
full inline sequence, in order from the leaf-most call's id to the outermost
inlined call.

Module Flags Metadata
=====================

Information about the module as a whole is difficult to convey to LLVM's
subsystems. The LLVM IR isn't sufficient to transmit this information.
The ``llvm.module.flags`` named metadata exists in order to facilitate
this. These flags are in the form of key / value pairs --- much like a
dictionary --- making it easy for any subsystem who cares about a flag to
look it up.

The ``llvm.module.flags`` metadata contains a list of metadata triplets.
Each triplet has the following form:

-  The first element is a *behavior* flag, which specifies the behavior
   when two (or more) modules are merged together, and it encounters two
   (or more) metadata with the same ID. The supported behaviors are
   described below.
-  The second element is a metadata string that is a unique ID for the
   metadata. Each module may only have one flag entry for each unique ID (not
   including entries with the **Require** behavior).
-  The third element is the value of the flag.

When two (or more) modules are merged together, the resulting
``llvm.module.flags`` metadata is the union of the modules' flags. That is, for
each unique metadata ID string, there will be exactly one entry in the merged
modules ``llvm.module.flags`` metadata table, and the value for that entry will
be determined by the merge behavior flag, as described below. The only exception
is that entries with the *Require* behavior are always preserved.

The following behaviors are supported:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 10 90

   * - Value
     - Behavior

   * - 1
     - **Error**
           Emits an error if two values disagree, otherwise the resulting value
           is that of the operands.

   * - 2
     - **Warning**
           Emits a warning if two values disagree. The result value will be the
           operand for the flag from the first module being linked, unless the
           other module uses **Min** or **Max**, in which case the result will
           be **Min** (with the min value) or **Max** (with the max value),
           respectively.

   * - 3
     - **Require**
           Adds a requirement that another module flag be present and have a
           specified value after linking is performed. The value must be a
           metadata pair, where the first element of the pair is the ID of the
           module flag to be restricted, and the second element of the pair is
           the value the module flag should be restricted to. This behavior can
           be used to restrict the allowable results (via triggering of an
           error) of linking IDs with the **Override** behavior.

   * - 4
     - **Override**
           Uses the specified value, regardless of the behavior or value of the
           other module. If both modules specify **Override**, but the values
           differ, an error will be emitted.

   * - 5
     - **Append**
           Appends the two values, which are required to be metadata nodes.

   * - 6
     - **AppendUnique**
           Appends the two values, which are required to be metadata
           nodes. However, duplicate entries in the second list are dropped
           during the append operation.

   * - 7
     - **Max**
           Takes the max of the two values, which are required to be integers.

   * - 8
     - **Min**
           Takes the min of the two values, which are required to be non-negative integers.
           An absent module flag is treated as having the value 0.

It is an error for a particular unique flag ID to have multiple behaviors,
except in the case of **Require** (which adds restrictions on another metadata
value) or **Override**.

An example of module flags:

.. code-block:: llvm

    !0 = !{ i32 1, !"foo", i32 1 }
    !1 = !{ i32 4, !"bar", i32 37 }
    !2 = !{ i32 2, !"qux", i32 42 }
    !3 = !{ i32 3, !"qux",
      !{
        !"foo", i32 1
      }
    }
    !llvm.module.flags = !{ !0, !1, !2, !3 }

-  Metadata ``!0`` has the ID ``!"foo"`` and the value '1'. The behavior
   if two or more ``!"foo"`` flags are seen is to emit an error if their
   values are not equal.

-  Metadata ``!1`` has the ID ``!"bar"`` and the value '37'. The
   behavior if two or more ``!"bar"`` flags are seen is to use the value
   '37'.

-  Metadata ``!2`` has the ID ``!"qux"`` and the value '42'. The
   behavior if two or more ``!"qux"`` flags are seen is to emit a
   warning if their values are not equal.

-  Metadata ``!3`` has the ID ``!"qux"`` and the value:

   ::

       !{ !"foo", i32 1 }

   The behavior is to emit an error if the ``llvm.module.flags`` does not
   contain a flag with the ID ``!"foo"`` that has the value '1' after linking is
   performed.

Synthesized Functions Module Flags Metadata
-------------------------------------------

These metadata specify the default attributes synthesized functions should have.
These metadata are currently respected by a few instrumentation passes, such as
sanitizers.

These metadata correspond to a few function attributes with significant code
generation behaviors. Function attributes with just optimization purposes
should not be listed because the performance impact of these synthesized
functions is small.

- "frame-pointer": **Max**. The value can be 0, 1, or 2. A synthesized function
  will get the "frame-pointer" function attribute, with value being "none",
  "non-leaf", or "all", respectively.
- "function_return_thunk_extern": The synthesized function will get the
  ``fn_return_thunk_extern`` function attribute.
- "uwtable": **Max**. The value can be 0, 1, or 2. If the value is 1, a synthesized
  function will get the ``uwtable(sync)`` function attribute, if the value is 2,
  a synthesized function will get the ``uwtable(async)`` function attribute.

Objective-C Garbage Collection Module Flags Metadata
----------------------------------------------------

On the Mach-O platform, Objective-C stores metadata about garbage
collection in a special section called "image info". The metadata
consists of a version number and a bitmask specifying what types of
garbage collection are supported (if any) by the file. If two or more
modules are linked together their garbage collection metadata needs to
be merged rather than appended together.

The Objective-C garbage collection module flags metadata consists of the
following key-value pairs:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Key
     - Value

   * - ``Objective-C Version``
     - **[Required]** --- The Objective-C ABI version. Valid values are 1 and 2.

   * - ``Objective-C Image Info Version``
     - **[Required]** --- The version of the image info section. Currently
       always 0.

   * - ``Objective-C Image Info Section``
     - **[Required]** --- The section to place the metadata. Valid values are
       ``"__OBJC, __image_info, regular"`` for Objective-C ABI version 1, and
       ``"__DATA,__objc_imageinfo, regular, no_dead_strip"`` for
       Objective-C ABI version 2.

   * - ``Objective-C Garbage Collection``
     - **[Required]** --- Specifies whether garbage collection is supported or
       not. Valid values are 0, for no garbage collection, and 2, for garbage
       collection supported.

   * - ``Objective-C GC Only``
     - **[Optional]** --- Specifies that only garbage collection is supported.
       If present, its value must be 6. This flag requires that the
       ``Objective-C Garbage Collection`` flag have the value 2.

Some important flag interactions:

-  If a module with ``Objective-C Garbage Collection`` set to 0 is
   merged with a module with ``Objective-C Garbage Collection`` set to
   2, then the resulting module has the
   ``Objective-C Garbage Collection`` flag set to 0.
-  A module with ``Objective-C Garbage Collection`` set to 0 cannot be
   merged with a module with ``Objective-C GC Only`` set to 6.

C type width Module Flags Metadata
----------------------------------

The ARM backend emits a section into each generated object file describing the
options that it was compiled with (in a compiler-independent way) to prevent
linking incompatible objects, and to allow automatic library selection. Some
of these options are not visible at the IR level, namely wchar_t width and enum
width.

To pass this information to the backend, these options are encoded in module
flags metadata, using the following key-value pairs:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Key
     - Value

   * - short_wchar
     - * 0 --- sizeof(wchar_t) == 4
       * 1 --- sizeof(wchar_t) == 2

   * - short_enum
     - * 0 --- Enums are at least as large as an ``int``.
       * 1 --- Enums are stored in the smallest integer type which can
         represent all of its values.

For example, the following metadata section specifies that the module was
compiled with a ``wchar_t`` width of 4 bytes, and the underlying type of an
enum is the smallest type which can represent all of its values::

    !llvm.module.flags = !{!0, !1}
    !0 = !{i32 1, !"short_wchar", i32 1}
    !1 = !{i32 1, !"short_enum", i32 0}

Stack Alignment Metadata
------------------------

Changes the default stack alignment from the target ABI's implicit default
stack alignment. Takes an i32 value in bytes. It is considered an error to link
two modules together with different values for this metadata.

For example:

    !llvm.module.flags = !{!0}
    !0 = !{i32 1, !"override-stack-alignment", i32 8}

This will change the stack alignment to 8B.

Embedded Objects Names Metadata
===============================

Offloading compilations need to embed device code into the host section table to
create a fat binary. This metadata node references each global that will be
embedded in the module. The primary use for this is to make referencing these
globals more efficient in the IR. The metadata references nodes containing
pointers to the global to be embedded followed by the section name it will be
stored at::

    !llvm.embedded.objects = !{!0}
    !0 = !{ptr @object, !".section"}

Automatic Linker Flags Named Metadata
=====================================

Some targets support embedding of flags to the linker inside individual object
files. Typically this is used in conjunction with language extensions which
allow source files to contain linker command line options, and have these
automatically be transmitted to the linker via object files.

These flags are encoded in the IR using named metadata with the name
``!llvm.linker.options``. Each operand is expected to be a metadata node
which should be a list of other metadata nodes, each of which should be a
list of metadata strings defining linker options.

For example, the following metadata section specifies two separate sets of
linker options, presumably to link against ``libz`` and the ``Cocoa``
framework::

    !0 = !{ !"-lz" }
    !1 = !{ !"-framework", !"Cocoa" }
    !llvm.linker.options = !{ !0, !1 }

The metadata encoding as lists of lists of options, as opposed to a collapsed
list of options, is chosen so that the IR encoding can use multiple option
strings to specify e.g., a single library, while still having that specifier be
preserved as an atomic element that can be recognized by a target specific
assembly writer or object file emitter.

Each individual option is required to be either a valid option for the target's
linker, or an option that is reserved by the target specific assembly writer or
object file emitter. No other aspect of these options is defined by the IR.

Dependent Libs Named Metadata
=============================

Some targets support embedding of strings into object files to indicate
a set of libraries to add to the link. Typically this is used in conjunction
with language extensions which allow source files to explicitly declare the
libraries they depend on, and have these automatically be transmitted to the
linker via object files.

The list is encoded in the IR using named metadata with the name
``!llvm.dependent-libraries``. Each operand is expected to be a metadata node
which should contain a single string operand.

For example, the following metadata section contains two library specifiers::

    !0 = !{!"a library specifier"}
    !1 = !{!"another library specifier"}
    !llvm.dependent-libraries = !{ !0, !1 }

Each library specifier will be handled independently by the consuming linker.
The effect of the library specifiers are defined by the consuming linker.

.. _summary:

ThinLTO Summary
===============

Compiling with `ThinLTO <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThinLTO.html>`_
causes the building of a compact summary of the module that is emitted into
the bitcode. The summary is emitted into the LLVM assembly and identified
in syntax by a caret ('``^``').

The summary is parsed into a bitcode output, along with the Module
IR, via the "``llvm-as``" tool. Tools that parse the Module IR for the purposes
of optimization (e.g. "``clang -x ir``" and "``opt``"), will ignore the
summary entries (just as they currently ignore summary entries in a bitcode
input file).

Eventually, the summary will be parsed into a ModuleSummaryIndex object under
the same conditions where summary index is currently built from bitcode.
Specifically, tools that test the Thin Link portion of a ThinLTO compile
(i.e. llvm-lto and llvm-lto2), or when parsing a combined index
for a distributed ThinLTO backend via clang's "``-fthinlto-index=<>``" flag
(this part is not yet implemented, use llvm-as to create a bitcode object
before feeding into thin link tools for now).

There are currently 3 types of summary entries in the LLVM assembly:
:ref:`module paths<module_path_summary>`,
:ref:`global values<gv_summary>`, and
:ref:`type identifiers<typeid_summary>`.

.. _module_path_summary:

Module Path Summary Entry
-------------------------

Each module path summary entry lists a module containing global values included
in the summary. For a single IR module there will be one such entry, but
in a combined summary index produced during the thin link, there will be
one module path entry per linked module with summary.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    ^0 = module: (path: "/path/to/file.o", hash: (2468601609, 1329373163, 1565878005, 638838075, 3148790418))

The ``path`` field is a string path to the bitcode file, and the ``hash``
field is the 160-bit SHA-1 hash of the IR bitcode contents, used for
incremental builds and caching.

.. _gv_summary:

Global Value Summary Entry
--------------------------

Each global value summary entry corresponds to a global value defined or
referenced by a summarized module.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    ^4 = gv: (name: "f"[, summaries: (Summary)[, (Summary)]*]?) ; guid = 14740650423002898831

For declarations, there will not be a summary list. For definitions, a
global value will contain a list of summaries, one per module containing
a definition. There can be multiple entries in a combined summary index
for symbols with weak linkage.

Each ``Summary`` format will depend on whether the global value is a
:ref:`function<function_summary>`, :ref:`variable<variable_summary>`, or
:ref:`alias<alias_summary>`.

.. _function_summary:

Function Summary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the global value is a function, the ``Summary`` entry will look like:

.. code-block:: text

    function: (module: ^0, flags: (linkage: external, notEligibleToImport: 0, live: 0, dsoLocal: 0), insts: 2[, FuncFlags]?[, Calls]?[, TypeIdInfo]?[, Params]?[, Refs]?

The ``module`` field includes the summary entry id for the module containing
this definition, and the ``flags`` field contains information such as
the linkage type, a flag indicating whether it is legal to import the
definition, whether it is globally live and whether the linker resolved it
to a local definition (the latter two are populated during the thin link).
The ``insts`` field contains the number of IR instructions in the function.
Finally, there are several optional fields: :ref:`FuncFlags<funcflags_summary>`,
:ref:`Calls<calls_summary>`, :ref:`TypeIdInfo<typeidinfo_summary>`,
:ref:`Params<params_summary>`, :ref:`Refs<refs_summary>`.

.. _variable_summary:

Global Variable Summary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the global value is a variable, the ``Summary`` entry will look like:

.. code-block:: text

    variable: (module: ^0, flags: (linkage: external, notEligibleToImport: 0, live: 0, dsoLocal: 0)[, Refs]?

The variable entry contains a subset of the fields in a
:ref:`function summary <function_summary>`, see the descriptions there.

.. _alias_summary:

Alias Summary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the global value is an alias, the ``Summary`` entry will look like:

.. code-block:: text

    alias: (module: ^0, flags: (linkage: external, notEligibleToImport: 0, live: 0, dsoLocal: 0), aliasee: ^2)

The ``module`` and ``flags`` fields are as described for a
:ref:`function summary <function_summary>`. The ``aliasee`` field
contains a reference to the global value summary entry of the aliasee.

.. _funcflags_summary:

Function Flags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The optional ``FuncFlags`` field looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    funcFlags: (readNone: 0, readOnly: 0, noRecurse: 0, returnDoesNotAlias: 0, noInline: 0, alwaysInline: 0, noUnwind: 1, mayThrow: 0, hasUnknownCall: 0)

If unspecified, flags are assumed to hold the conservative ``false`` value of
``0``.

.. _calls_summary:

Calls
^^^^^

The optional ``Calls`` field looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    calls: ((Callee)[, (Callee)]*)

where each ``Callee`` looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    callee: ^1[, hotness: None]?[, relbf: 0]?

The ``callee`` refers to the summary entry id of the callee. At most one
of ``hotness`` (which can take the values ``Unknown``, ``Cold``, ``None``,
``Hot``, and ``Critical``), and ``relbf`` (which holds the integer
branch frequency relative to the entry frequency, scaled down by 2^8)
may be specified. The defaults are ``Unknown`` and ``0``, respectively.

.. _params_summary:

Params
^^^^^^

The optional ``Params`` is used by ``StackSafety`` and looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    Params: ((Param)[, (Param)]*)

where each ``Param`` describes pointer parameter access inside of the
function and looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    param: 4, offset: [0, 5][, calls: ((Callee)[, (Callee)]*)]?

where the first ``param`` is the number of the parameter it describes,
``offset`` is the inclusive range of offsets from the pointer parameter to bytes
which can be accessed by the function. This range does not include accesses by
function calls from ``calls`` list.

where each ``Callee`` describes how parameter is forwarded into other
functions and looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    callee: ^3, param: 5, offset: [-3, 3]

The ``callee`` refers to the summary entry id of the callee,  ``param`` is
the number of the callee parameter which points into the callers parameter
with offset known to be inside of the ``offset`` range. ``calls`` will be
consumed and removed by thin link stage to update ``Param::offset`` so it
covers all accesses possible by ``calls``.

Pointer parameter without corresponding ``Param`` is considered unsafe and we
assume that access with any offset is possible.

Example:

If we have the following function:

.. code-block:: text

    define i64 @foo(ptr %0, ptr %1, ptr %2, i8 %3) {
      store ptr %1, ptr @x
      %5 = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %2, i64 5
      %6 = load i8, ptr %5
      %7 = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %2, i8 %3
      tail call void @bar(i8 %3, ptr %7)
      %8 = load i64, ptr %0
      ret i64 %8
    }

We can expect the record like this:

.. code-block:: text

    params: ((param: 0, offset: [0, 7]),(param: 2, offset: [5, 5], calls: ((callee: ^3, param: 1, offset: [-128, 127]))))

The function may access just 8 bytes of the parameter %0 . ``calls`` is empty,
so the parameter is either not used for function calls or ``offset`` already
covers all accesses from nested function calls.
Parameter %1 escapes, so access is unknown.
The function itself can access just a single byte of the parameter %2. Additional
access is possible inside of the ``@bar`` or ``^3``. The function adds signed
offset to the pointer and passes the result as the argument %1 into ``^3``.
This record itself does not tell us how ``^3`` will access the parameter.
Parameter %3 is not a pointer.

.. _refs_summary:

Refs
^^^^

The optional ``Refs`` field looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    refs: ((Ref)[, (Ref)]*)

where each ``Ref`` contains a reference to the summary id of the referenced
value (e.g. ``^1``).

.. _typeidinfo_summary:

TypeIdInfo
^^^^^^^^^^

The optional ``TypeIdInfo`` field, used for
`Control Flow Integrity <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ControlFlowIntegrity.html>`_,
looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    typeIdInfo: [(TypeTests)]?[, (TypeTestAssumeVCalls)]?[, (TypeCheckedLoadVCalls)]?[, (TypeTestAssumeConstVCalls)]?[, (TypeCheckedLoadConstVCalls)]?

These optional fields have the following forms:

TypeTests
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

    typeTests: (TypeIdRef[, TypeIdRef]*)

Where each ``TypeIdRef`` refers to a :ref:`type id<typeid_summary>`
by summary id or ``GUID``.

TypeTestAssumeVCalls
""""""""""""""""""""

.. code-block:: text

    typeTestAssumeVCalls: (VFuncId[, VFuncId]*)

Where each VFuncId has the format:

.. code-block:: text

    vFuncId: (TypeIdRef, offset: 16)

Where each ``TypeIdRef`` refers to a :ref:`type id<typeid_summary>`
by summary id or ``GUID`` preceded by a ``guid:`` tag.

TypeCheckedLoadVCalls
"""""""""""""""""""""

.. code-block:: text

    typeCheckedLoadVCalls: (VFuncId[, VFuncId]*)

Where each VFuncId has the format described for ``TypeTestAssumeVCalls``.

TypeTestAssumeConstVCalls
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. code-block:: text

    typeTestAssumeConstVCalls: (ConstVCall[, ConstVCall]*)

Where each ConstVCall has the format:

.. code-block:: text

    (VFuncId, args: (Arg[, Arg]*))

and where each VFuncId has the format described for ``TypeTestAssumeVCalls``,
and each Arg is an integer argument number.

TypeCheckedLoadConstVCalls
""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. code-block:: text

    typeCheckedLoadConstVCalls: (ConstVCall[, ConstVCall]*)

Where each ConstVCall has the format described for
``TypeTestAssumeConstVCalls``.

.. _typeid_summary:

Type ID Summary Entry
---------------------

Each type id summary entry corresponds to a type identifier resolution
which is generated during the LTO link portion of the compile when building
with `Control Flow Integrity <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ControlFlowIntegrity.html>`_,
so these are only present in a combined summary index.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    ^4 = typeid: (name: "_ZTS1A", summary: (typeTestRes: (kind: allOnes, sizeM1BitWidth: 7[, alignLog2: 0]?[, sizeM1: 0]?[, bitMask: 0]?[, inlineBits: 0]?)[, WpdResolutions]?)) ; guid = 7004155349499253778

The ``typeTestRes`` gives the type test resolution ``kind`` (which may
be ``unsat``, ``byteArray``, ``inline``, ``single``, or ``allOnes``), and
the ``size-1`` bit width. It is followed by optional flags, which default to 0,
and an optional WpdResolutions (whole program devirtualization resolution)
field that looks like:

.. code-block:: text

    wpdResolutions: ((offset: 0, WpdRes)[, (offset: 1, WpdRes)]*

where each entry is a mapping from the given byte offset to the whole-program
devirtualization resolution WpdRes, that has one of the following formats:

.. code-block:: text

    wpdRes: (kind: branchFunnel)
    wpdRes: (kind: singleImpl, singleImplName: "_ZN1A1nEi")
    wpdRes: (kind: indir)

Additionally, each wpdRes has an optional ``resByArg`` field, which
describes the resolutions for calls with all constant integer arguments:

.. code-block:: text

    resByArg: (ResByArg[, ResByArg]*)

where ResByArg is:

.. code-block:: text

    args: (Arg[, Arg]*), byArg: (kind: UniformRetVal[, info: 0][, byte: 0][, bit: 0])

Where the ``kind`` can be ``Indir``, ``UniformRetVal``, ``UniqueRetVal``
or ``VirtualConstProp``. The ``info`` field is only used if the kind
is ``UniformRetVal`` (indicates the uniform return value), or
``UniqueRetVal`` (holds the return value associated with the unique vtable
(0 or 1)). The ``byte`` and ``bit`` fields are only used if the target does
not support the use of absolute symbols to store constants.

.. _intrinsicglobalvariables:

Intrinsic Global Variables
==========================

LLVM has a number of "magic" global variables that contain data that
affect code generation or other IR semantics. These are documented here.
All globals of this sort should have a section specified as
"``llvm.metadata``". This section and all globals that start with
"``llvm.``" are reserved for use by LLVM.

.. _gv_llvmused:

The '``llvm.used``' Global Variable
-----------------------------------

The ``@llvm.used`` global is an array which has
:ref:`appending linkage <linkage_appending>`. This array contains a list of
pointers to named global variables, functions and aliases which may optionally
have a pointer cast formed of bitcast or getelementptr. For example, a legal
use of it is:

.. code-block:: llvm

    @X = global i8 4
    @Y = global i32 123

    @llvm.used = appending global [2 x ptr] [
       ptr @X,
       ptr @Y
    ], section "llvm.metadata"

If a symbol appears in the ``@llvm.used`` list, then the compiler, assembler,
and linker are required to treat the symbol as if there is a reference to the
symbol that it cannot see (which is why they have to be named). For example, if
a variable has internal linkage and no references other than that from the
``@llvm.used`` list, it cannot be deleted. This is commonly used to represent
references from inline asms and other things the compiler cannot "see", and
corresponds to "``attribute((used))``" in GNU C.

On some targets, the code generator must emit a directive to the
assembler or object file to prevent the assembler and linker from
removing the symbol.

.. _gv_llvmcompilerused:

The '``llvm.compiler.used``' Global Variable
--------------------------------------------

The ``@llvm.compiler.used`` directive is the same as the ``@llvm.used``
directive, except that it only prevents the compiler from touching the
symbol. On targets that support it, this allows an intelligent linker to
optimize references to the symbol without being impeded as it would be
by ``@llvm.used``.

This is a rare construct that should only be used in rare circumstances,
and should not be exposed to source languages.

.. _gv_llvmglobalctors:

The '``llvm.global_ctors``' Global Variable
-------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: llvm

    %0 = type { i32, ptr, ptr }
    @llvm.global_ctors = appending global [1 x %0] [%0 { i32 65535, ptr @ctor, ptr @data }]

The ``@llvm.global_ctors`` array contains a list of constructor
functions, priorities, and an associated global or function.
The functions referenced by this array will be called in ascending order
of priority (i.e. lowest first) when the module is loaded. The order of
functions with the same priority is not defined.

If the third field is non-null, and points to a global variable
or function, the initializer function will only run if the associated
data from the current module is not discarded.
On ELF the referenced global variable or function must be in a comdat.

.. _llvmglobaldtors:

The '``llvm.global_dtors``' Global Variable
-------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: llvm

    %0 = type { i32, ptr, ptr }
    @llvm.global_dtors = appending global [1 x %0] [%0 { i32 65535, ptr @dtor, ptr @data }]

The ``@llvm.global_dtors`` array contains a list of destructor
functions, priorities, and an associated global or function.
The functions referenced by this array will be called in descending
order of priority (i.e. highest first) when the module is unloaded. The
order of functions with the same priority is not defined.

If the third field is non-null, and points to a global variable
or function, the destructor function will only run if the associated
data from the current module is not discarded.
On ELF the referenced global variable or function must be in a comdat.

Instruction Reference
=====================

The LLVM instruction set consists of several different classifications
of instructions: :ref:`terminator instructions <terminators>`, :ref:`binary
instructions <binaryops>`, :ref:`bitwise binary
instructions <bitwiseops>`, :ref:`memory instructions <memoryops>`, and
:ref:`other instructions <otherops>`. There are also :ref:`debug records
<debugrecords>`, which are not instructions themselves but are printed
interleaved with instructions to describe changes in the state of the program's
debug information at each position in the program's execution.

.. _terminators:

Terminator Instructions
-----------------------

As mentioned :ref:`previously <functionstructure>`, every basic block in a
program ends with a "Terminator" instruction, which indicates which
block should be executed after the current block is finished. These
terminator instructions typically yield a '``void``' value: they produce
control flow, not values (the one exception being the
':ref:`invoke <i_invoke>`' instruction).

The terminator instructions are: ':ref:`ret <i_ret>`',
':ref:`br <i_br>`', ':ref:`switch <i_switch>`',
':ref:`indirectbr <i_indirectbr>`', ':ref:`invoke <i_invoke>`',
':ref:`callbr <i_callbr>`'
':ref:`resume <i_resume>`', ':ref:`catchswitch <i_catchswitch>`',
':ref:`catchret <i_catchret>`',
':ref:`cleanupret <i_cleanupret>`',
and ':ref:`unreachable <i_unreachable>`'.

.. _i_ret:

'``ret``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      ret <type> <value>       ; Return a value from a non-void function
      ret void                 ; Return from void function

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``ret``' instruction is used to return control flow (and optionally
a value) from a function back to the caller.

There are two forms of the '``ret``' instruction: one that returns a
value and then causes control flow, and one that just causes control
flow to occur.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``ret``' instruction optionally accepts a single argument, the
return value. The type of the return value must be a ':ref:`first
class <t_firstclass>`' type.

A function is not :ref:`well formed <wellformed>` if it has a non-void
return type and contains a '``ret``' instruction with no return value or
a return value with a type that does not match its type, or if it has a
void return type and contains a '``ret``' instruction with a return
value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

When the '``ret``' instruction is executed, control flow returns back to
the calling function's context. If the caller is a
":ref:`call <i_call>`" instruction, execution continues at the
instruction after the call. If the caller was an
":ref:`invoke <i_invoke>`" instruction, execution continues at the
beginning of the "normal" destination block. If the instruction returns
a value, that value shall set the call or invoke instruction's return
value.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      ret i32 5                       ; Return an integer value of 5
      ret void                        ; Return from a void function
      ret { i32, i8 } { i32 4, i8 2 } ; Return a struct of values 4 and 2

.. _i_br:

'``br``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      br i1 <cond>, label <iftrue>, label <iffalse>
      br label <dest>          ; Unconditional branch

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``br``' instruction is used to cause control flow to transfer to a
different basic block in the current function. There are two forms of
this instruction, corresponding to a conditional branch and an
unconditional branch.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The conditional branch form of the '``br``' instruction takes a single
'``i1``' value and two '``label``' values. The unconditional form of the
'``br``' instruction takes a single '``label``' value as a target.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Upon execution of a conditional '``br``' instruction, the '``i1``'
argument is evaluated. If the value is ``true``, control flows to the
'``iftrue``' ``label`` argument. If "cond" is ``false``, control flows
to the '``iffalse``' ``label`` argument.
If '``cond``' is ``poison`` or ``undef``, this instruction has undefined
behavior.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

    Test:
      %cond = icmp eq i32 %a, %b
      br i1 %cond, label %IfEqual, label %IfUnequal
    IfEqual:
      ret i32 1
    IfUnequal:
      ret i32 0

.. _i_switch:

'``switch``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      switch <intty> <value>, label <defaultdest> [ <intty> <val>, label <dest> ... ]

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``switch``' instruction is used to transfer control flow to one of
several different places. It is a generalization of the '``br``'
instruction, allowing a branch to occur to one of many possible
destinations.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``switch``' instruction uses three parameters: an integer
comparison value '``value``', a default '``label``' destination, and an
array of pairs of comparison value constants and '``label``'s. The table
is not allowed to contain duplicate constant entries.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``switch`` instruction specifies a table of values and destinations.
When the '``switch``' instruction is executed, this table is searched
for the given value. If the value is found, control flow is transferred
to the corresponding destination; otherwise, control flow is transferred
to the default destination.
If '``value``' is ``poison`` or ``undef``, this instruction has undefined
behavior.

Implementation:
"""""""""""""""

Depending on properties of the target machine and the particular
``switch`` instruction, this instruction may be code generated in
different ways. For example, it could be generated as a series of
chained conditional branches or with a lookup table.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

     ; Emulate a conditional br instruction
     %Val = zext i1 %value to i32
     switch i32 %Val, label %truedest [ i32 0, label %falsedest ]

     ; Emulate an unconditional br instruction
     switch i32 0, label %dest [ ]

     ; Implement a jump table:
     switch i32 %val, label %otherwise [ i32 0, label %onzero
                                         i32 1, label %onone
                                         i32 2, label %ontwo ]

.. _i_indirectbr:

'``indirectbr``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      indirectbr ptr <address>, [ label <dest1>, label <dest2>, ... ]

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``indirectbr``' instruction implements an indirect branch to a
label within the current function, whose address is specified by
"``address``". Address must be derived from a
:ref:`blockaddress <blockaddress>` constant.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``address``' argument is the address of the label to jump to. The
rest of the arguments indicate the full set of possible destinations
that the address may point to. Blocks are allowed to occur multiple
times in the destination list, though this isn't particularly useful.

This destination list is required so that dataflow analysis has an
accurate understanding of the CFG.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Control transfers to the block specified in the address argument. All
possible destination blocks must be listed in the label list, otherwise
this instruction has undefined behavior. This implies that jumps to
labels defined in other functions have undefined behavior as well.
If '``address``' is ``poison`` or ``undef``, this instruction has undefined
behavior.

Implementation:
"""""""""""""""

This is typically implemented with a jump through a register.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

     indirectbr ptr %Addr, [ label %bb1, label %bb2, label %bb3 ]

.. _i_invoke:

'``invoke``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = invoke [cconv] [ret attrs] [addrspace(<num>)] <ty>|<fnty> <fnptrval>(<function args>) [fn attrs]
                    [operand bundles] to label <normal label> unwind label <exception label>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``invoke``' instruction causes control to transfer to a specified
function, with the possibility of control flow transfer to either the
'``normal``' label or the '``exception``' label. If the callee function
returns with the "``ret``" instruction, control flow will return to the
"normal" label. If the callee (or any indirect callees) returns via the
":ref:`resume <i_resume>`" instruction or other exception handling
mechanism, control is interrupted and continued at the dynamically
nearest "exception" label.

The '``exception``' label is a `landing
pad <ExceptionHandling.html#overview>`_ for the exception. As such,
'``exception``' label is required to have the
":ref:`landingpad <i_landingpad>`" instruction, which contains the
information about the behavior of the program after unwinding happens,
as its first non-PHI instruction. The restrictions on the
"``landingpad``" instruction's tightly couples it to the "``invoke``"
instruction, so that the important information contained within the
"``landingpad``" instruction can't be lost through normal code motion.

Arguments:
""""""""""

This instruction requires several arguments:

#. The optional "cconv" marker indicates which :ref:`calling
   convention <callingconv>` the call should use. If none is
   specified, the call defaults to using C calling conventions.
#. The optional :ref:`Parameter Attributes <paramattrs>` list for return
   values. Only '``zeroext``', '``signext``', and '``inreg``' attributes
   are valid here.
#. The optional addrspace attribute can be used to indicate the address space
   of the called function. If it is not specified, the program address space
   from the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>` will be used.
#. '``ty``': the type of the call instruction itself which is also the
   type of the return value. Functions that return no value are marked
   ``void``.
#. '``fnty``': shall be the signature of the function being invoked. The
   argument types must match the types implied by this signature. This
   type can be omitted if the function is not varargs.
#. '``fnptrval``': An LLVM value containing a pointer to a function to
   be invoked. In most cases, this is a direct function invocation, but
   indirect ``invoke``'s are just as possible, calling an arbitrary pointer
   to function value.
#. '``function args``': argument list whose types match the function
   signature argument types and parameter attributes. All arguments must
   be of :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type. If the function signature
   indicates the function accepts a variable number of arguments, the
   extra arguments can be specified.
#. '``normal label``': the label reached when the called function
   executes a '``ret``' instruction.
#. '``exception label``': the label reached when a callee returns via
   the :ref:`resume <i_resume>` instruction or other exception handling
   mechanism.
#. The optional :ref:`function attributes <fnattrs>` list.
#. The optional :ref:`operand bundles <opbundles>` list.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This instruction is designed to operate as a standard '``call``'
instruction in most regards. The primary difference is that it
establishes an association with a label, which is used by the runtime
library to unwind the stack.

This instruction is used in languages with destructors to ensure that
proper cleanup is performed in the case of either a ``longjmp`` or a
thrown exception. Additionally, this is important for implementation of
'``catch``' clauses in high-level languages that support them.

For the purposes of the SSA form, the definition of the value returned
by the '``invoke``' instruction is deemed to occur on the edge from the
current block to the "normal" label. If the callee unwinds then no
return value is available.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %retval = invoke i32 @Test(i32 15) to label %Continue
                  unwind label %TestCleanup              ; i32:retval set
      %retval = invoke coldcc i32 %Testfnptr(i32 15) to label %Continue
                  unwind label %TestCleanup              ; i32:retval set

.. _i_callbr:

'``callbr``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = callbr [cconv] [ret attrs] [addrspace(<num>)] <ty>|<fnty> <fnptrval>(<function args>) [fn attrs]
                    [operand bundles] to label <fallthrough label> [indirect labels]

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``callbr``' instruction causes control to transfer to a specified
function, with the possibility of control flow transfer to either the
'``fallthrough``' label or one of the '``indirect``' labels.

This instruction should only be used to implement the "goto" feature of gcc
style inline assembly. Any other usage is an error in the IR verifier.

Note that in order to support outputs along indirect edges, LLVM may need to
split critical edges, which may require synthesizing a replacement block for
the ``indirect labels``. Therefore, the address of a label as seen by another
``callbr`` instruction, or for a :ref:`blockaddress <blockaddress>` constant,
may not be equal to the address provided for the same block to this
instruction's ``indirect labels`` operand. The assembly code may only transfer
control to addresses provided via this instruction's ``indirect labels``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

This instruction requires several arguments:

#. The optional "cconv" marker indicates which :ref:`calling
   convention <callingconv>` the call should use. If none is
   specified, the call defaults to using C calling conventions.
#. The optional :ref:`Parameter Attributes <paramattrs>` list for return
   values. Only '``zeroext``', '``signext``', and '``inreg``' attributes
   are valid here.
#. The optional addrspace attribute can be used to indicate the address space
   of the called function. If it is not specified, the program address space
   from the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>` will be used.
#. '``ty``': the type of the call instruction itself which is also the
   type of the return value. Functions that return no value are marked
   ``void``.
#. '``fnty``': shall be the signature of the function being called. The
   argument types must match the types implied by this signature. This
   type can be omitted if the function is not varargs.
#. '``fnptrval``': An LLVM value containing a pointer to a function to
   be called. In most cases, this is a direct function call, but
   other ``callbr``'s are just as possible, calling an arbitrary pointer
   to function value.
#. '``function args``': argument list whose types match the function
   signature argument types and parameter attributes. All arguments must
   be of :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type. If the function signature
   indicates the function accepts a variable number of arguments, the
   extra arguments can be specified.
#. '``fallthrough label``': the label reached when the inline assembly's
   execution exits the bottom.
#. '``indirect labels``': the labels reached when a callee transfers control
   to a location other than the '``fallthrough label``'. Label constraints
   refer to these destinations.
#. The optional :ref:`function attributes <fnattrs>` list.
#. The optional :ref:`operand bundles <opbundles>` list.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This instruction is designed to operate as a standard '``call``'
instruction in most regards. The primary difference is that it
establishes an association with additional labels to define where control
flow goes after the call.

The output values of a '``callbr``' instruction are available both in the
the '``fallthrough``' block, and any '``indirect``' blocks(s).

The only use of this today is to implement the "goto" feature of gcc inline
assembly where additional labels can be provided as locations for the inline
assembly to jump to.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      ; "asm goto" without output constraints.
      callbr void asm "", "r,!i"(i32 %x)
                  to label %fallthrough [label %indirect]

      ; "asm goto" with output constraints.
      <result> = callbr i32 asm "", "=r,r,!i"(i32 %x)
                  to label %fallthrough [label %indirect]

.. _i_resume:

'``resume``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      resume <type> <value>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``resume``' instruction is a terminator instruction that has no
successors.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``resume``' instruction requires one argument, which must have the
same type as the result of any '``landingpad``' instruction in the same
function.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``resume``' instruction resumes propagation of an existing
(in-flight) exception whose unwinding was interrupted with a
:ref:`landingpad <i_landingpad>` instruction.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      resume { ptr, i32 } %exn

.. _i_catchswitch:

'``catchswitch``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <resultval> = catchswitch within <parent> [ label <handler1>, label <handler2>, ... ] unwind to caller
      <resultval> = catchswitch within <parent> [ label <handler1>, label <handler2>, ... ] unwind label <default>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``catchswitch``' instruction is used by `LLVM's exception handling system
<ExceptionHandling.html#overview>`_ to describe the set of possible catch handlers
that may be executed by the :ref:`EH personality routine <personalityfn>`.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``parent`` argument is the token of the funclet that contains the
``catchswitch`` instruction. If the ``catchswitch`` is not inside a funclet,
this operand may be the token ``none``.

The ``default`` argument is the label of another basic block beginning with
either a ``cleanuppad`` or ``catchswitch`` instruction.  This unwind destination
must be a legal target with respect to the ``parent`` links, as described in
the `exception handling documentation\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh-constraints>`_.

The ``handlers`` are a nonempty list of successor blocks that each begin with a
:ref:`catchpad <i_catchpad>` instruction.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Executing this instruction transfers control to one of the successors in
``handlers``, if appropriate, or continues to unwind via the unwind label if
present.

The ``catchswitch`` is both a terminator and a "pad" instruction, meaning that
it must be both the first non-phi instruction and last instruction in the basic
block. Therefore, it must be the only non-phi instruction in the block.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

    dispatch1:
      %cs1 = catchswitch within none [label %handler0, label %handler1] unwind to caller
    dispatch2:
      %cs2 = catchswitch within %parenthandler [label %handler0] unwind label %cleanup

.. _i_catchret:

'``catchret``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      catchret from <token> to label <normal>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``catchret``' instruction is a terminator instruction that has a
single successor.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to a '``catchret``' indicates which ``catchpad`` it
exits.  It must be a :ref:`catchpad <i_catchpad>`.
The second argument to a '``catchret``' specifies where control will
transfer to next.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``catchret``' instruction ends an existing (in-flight) exception whose
unwinding was interrupted with a :ref:`catchpad <i_catchpad>` instruction.  The
:ref:`personality function <personalityfn>` gets a chance to execute arbitrary
code to, for example, destroy the active exception.  Control then transfers to
``normal``.

The ``token`` argument must be a token produced by a ``catchpad`` instruction.
If the specified ``catchpad`` is not the most-recently-entered not-yet-exited
funclet pad (as described in the `EH documentation\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh-constraints>`_),
the ``catchret``'s behavior is undefined.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      catchret from %catch to label %continue

.. _i_cleanupret:

'``cleanupret``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      cleanupret from <value> unwind label <continue>
      cleanupret from <value> unwind to caller

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``cleanupret``' instruction is a terminator instruction that has
an optional successor.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``cleanupret``' instruction requires one argument, which indicates
which ``cleanuppad`` it exits, and must be a :ref:`cleanuppad <i_cleanuppad>`.
If the specified ``cleanuppad`` is not the most-recently-entered not-yet-exited
funclet pad (as described in the `EH documentation\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh-constraints>`_),
the ``cleanupret``'s behavior is undefined.

The '``cleanupret``' instruction also has an optional successor, ``continue``,
which must be the label of another basic block beginning with either a
``cleanuppad`` or ``catchswitch`` instruction.  This unwind destination must
be a legal target with respect to the ``parent`` links, as described in the
`exception handling documentation\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh-constraints>`_.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``cleanupret``' instruction indicates to the
:ref:`personality function <personalityfn>` that one
:ref:`cleanuppad <i_cleanuppad>` it transferred control to has ended.
It transfers control to ``continue`` or unwinds out of the function.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      cleanupret from %cleanup unwind to caller
      cleanupret from %cleanup unwind label %continue

.. _i_unreachable:

'``unreachable``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      unreachable

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``unreachable``' instruction has no defined semantics. This
instruction is used to inform the optimizer that a particular portion of
the code is not reachable. This can be used to indicate that the code
after a no-return function cannot be reached, and other facts.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``unreachable``' instruction has no defined semantics.

.. _unaryops:

Unary Operations
-----------------

Unary operators require a single operand, execute an operation on
it, and produce a single value. The operand might represent multiple
data, as is the case with the :ref:`vector <t_vector>` data type. The
result value has the same type as its operand.

.. _i_fneg:

'``fneg``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fneg [fast-math flags]* <ty> <op1>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fneg``' instruction returns the negation of its operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument to the '``fneg``' instruction must be a
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of
floating-point values.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is a copy of the operand with its sign bit flipped.
The value is otherwise completely identical; in particular, if the input is a
NaN, then the quiet/signaling bit and payload are perfectly preserved.

This instruction can also take any number of :ref:`fast-math
flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable otherwise
unsafe floating-point optimizations:

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = fneg float %val          ; yields float:result = -%var

.. _binaryops:

Binary Operations
-----------------

Binary operators are used to do most of the computation in a program.
They require two operands of the same type, execute an operation on
them, and produce a single value. The operands might represent multiple
data, as is the case with the :ref:`vector <t_vector>` data type. The
result value has the same type as its operands.

There are several different binary operators:

.. _i_add:

'``add``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = add <ty> <op1>, <op2>          ; yields ty:result
      <result> = add nuw <ty> <op1>, <op2>      ; yields ty:result
      <result> = add nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>      ; yields ty:result
      <result> = add nuw nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>  ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``add``' instruction returns the sum of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``add``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the integer sum of the two operands.

If the sum has unsigned overflow, the result returned is the
mathematical result modulo 2\ :sup:`n`\ , where n is the bit width of
the result.

Because LLVM integers use a two's complement representation, this
instruction is appropriate for both signed and unsigned integers.

``nuw`` and ``nsw`` stand for "No Unsigned Wrap" and "No Signed Wrap",
respectively. If the ``nuw`` and/or ``nsw`` keywords are present, the
result value of the ``add`` is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if
unsigned and/or signed overflow, respectively, occurs.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = add i32 4, %var          ; yields i32:result = 4 + %var

.. _i_fadd:

'``fadd``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fadd [fast-math flags]* <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fadd``' instruction returns the sum of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``fadd``' instruction must be
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of
floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point sum of the two operands.
This instruction is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>`.
This instruction can also take any number of :ref:`fast-math
flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable otherwise
unsafe floating-point optimizations:

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = fadd float 4.0, %var          ; yields float:result = 4.0 + %var

.. _i_sub:

'``sub``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = sub <ty> <op1>, <op2>          ; yields ty:result
      <result> = sub nuw <ty> <op1>, <op2>      ; yields ty:result
      <result> = sub nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>      ; yields ty:result
      <result> = sub nuw nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>  ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``sub``' instruction returns the difference of its two operands.

Note that the '``sub``' instruction is used to represent the '``neg``'
instruction present in most other intermediate representations.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``sub``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the integer difference of the two operands.

If the difference has unsigned overflow, the result returned is the
mathematical result modulo 2\ :sup:`n`\ , where n is the bit width of
the result.

Because LLVM integers use a two's complement representation, this
instruction is appropriate for both signed and unsigned integers.

``nuw`` and ``nsw`` stand for "No Unsigned Wrap" and "No Signed Wrap",
respectively. If the ``nuw`` and/or ``nsw`` keywords are present, the
result value of the ``sub`` is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if
unsigned and/or signed overflow, respectively, occurs.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = sub i32 4, %var          ; yields i32:result = 4 - %var
      <result> = sub i32 0, %val          ; yields i32:result = -%var

.. _i_fsub:

'``fsub``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fsub [fast-math flags]* <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fsub``' instruction returns the difference of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``fsub``' instruction must be
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of
floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point difference of the two operands.
This instruction is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>`.
This instruction can also take any number of :ref:`fast-math
flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable otherwise
unsafe floating-point optimizations:

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = fsub float 4.0, %var           ; yields float:result = 4.0 - %var
      <result> = fsub float -0.0, %val          ; yields float:result = -%var

.. _i_mul:

'``mul``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = mul <ty> <op1>, <op2>          ; yields ty:result
      <result> = mul nuw <ty> <op1>, <op2>      ; yields ty:result
      <result> = mul nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>      ; yields ty:result
      <result> = mul nuw nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>  ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``mul``' instruction returns the product of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``mul``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the integer product of the two operands.

If the result of the multiplication has unsigned overflow, the result
returned is the mathematical result modulo 2\ :sup:`n`\ , where n is the
bit width of the result.

Because LLVM integers use a two's complement representation, and the
result is the same width as the operands, this instruction returns the
correct result for both signed and unsigned integers. If a full product
(e.g. ``i32`` * ``i32`` -> ``i64``) is needed, the operands should be
sign-extended or zero-extended as appropriate to the width of the full
product.

``nuw`` and ``nsw`` stand for "No Unsigned Wrap" and "No Signed Wrap",
respectively. If the ``nuw`` and/or ``nsw`` keywords are present, the
result value of the ``mul`` is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if
unsigned and/or signed overflow, respectively, occurs.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = mul i32 4, %var          ; yields i32:result = 4 * %var

.. _i_fmul:

'``fmul``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fmul [fast-math flags]* <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fmul``' instruction returns the product of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``fmul``' instruction must be
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of
floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point product of the two operands.
This instruction is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>`.
This instruction can also take any number of :ref:`fast-math
flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable otherwise
unsafe floating-point optimizations:

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = fmul float 4.0, %var          ; yields float:result = 4.0 * %var

.. _i_udiv:

'``udiv``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = udiv <ty> <op1>, <op2>         ; yields ty:result
      <result> = udiv exact <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``udiv``' instruction returns the quotient of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``udiv``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the unsigned integer quotient of the two operands.

Note that unsigned integer division and signed integer division are
distinct operations; for signed integer division, use '``sdiv``'.

Division by zero is undefined behavior. For vectors, if any element
of the divisor is zero, the operation has undefined behavior.


If the ``exact`` keyword is present, the result value of the ``udiv`` is
a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if %op1 is not a multiple of %op2 (as
such, "((a udiv exact b) mul b) == a").

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = udiv i32 4, %var          ; yields i32:result = 4 / %var

.. _i_sdiv:

'``sdiv``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = sdiv <ty> <op1>, <op2>         ; yields ty:result
      <result> = sdiv exact <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``sdiv``' instruction returns the quotient of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``sdiv``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the signed integer quotient of the two operands
rounded towards zero.

Note that signed integer division and unsigned integer division are
distinct operations; for unsigned integer division, use '``udiv``'.

Division by zero is undefined behavior. For vectors, if any element
of the divisor is zero, the operation has undefined behavior.
Overflow also leads to undefined behavior; this is a rare case, but can
occur, for example, by doing a 32-bit division of -2147483648 by -1.

If the ``exact`` keyword is present, the result value of the ``sdiv`` is
a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if the result would be rounded.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = sdiv i32 4, %var          ; yields i32:result = 4 / %var

.. _i_fdiv:

'``fdiv``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fdiv [fast-math flags]* <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fdiv``' instruction returns the quotient of its two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``fdiv``' instruction must be
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of
floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point quotient of the two operands.
This instruction is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>`.
This instruction can also take any number of :ref:`fast-math
flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable otherwise
unsafe floating-point optimizations:

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = fdiv float 4.0, %var          ; yields float:result = 4.0 / %var

.. _i_urem:

'``urem``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = urem <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``urem``' instruction returns the remainder from the unsigned
division of its two arguments.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``urem``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This instruction returns the unsigned integer *remainder* of a division.
This instruction always performs an unsigned division to get the
remainder.

Note that unsigned integer remainder and signed integer remainder are
distinct operations; for signed integer remainder, use '``srem``'.

Taking the remainder of a division by zero is undefined behavior.
For vectors, if any element of the divisor is zero, the operation has
undefined behavior.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = urem i32 4, %var          ; yields i32:result = 4 % %var

.. _i_srem:

'``srem``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = srem <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``srem``' instruction returns the remainder from the signed
division of its two operands. This instruction can also take
:ref:`vector <t_vector>` versions of the values in which case the elements
must be integers.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``srem``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This instruction returns the *remainder* of a division (where the result
is either zero or has the same sign as the dividend, ``op1``), not the
*modulo* operator (where the result is either zero or has the same sign
as the divisor, ``op2``) of a value. For more information about the
difference, see `The Math
Forum <http://mathforum.org/dr.math/problems/anne.4.28.99.html>`_. For a
table of how this is implemented in various languages, please see
`Wikipedia: modulo
operation <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modulo_operation>`_.

Note that signed integer remainder and unsigned integer remainder are
distinct operations; for unsigned integer remainder, use '``urem``'.

Taking the remainder of a division by zero is undefined behavior.
For vectors, if any element of the divisor is zero, the operation has
undefined behavior.
Overflow also leads to undefined behavior; this is a rare case, but can
occur, for example, by taking the remainder of a 32-bit division of
-2147483648 by -1. (The remainder doesn't actually overflow, but this
rule lets srem be implemented using instructions that return both the
result of the division and the remainder.)

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = srem i32 4, %var          ; yields i32:result = 4 % %var

.. _i_frem:

'``frem``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = frem [fast-math flags]* <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``frem``' instruction returns the remainder from the division of
its two operands.

.. note::

	The instruction is implemented as a call to libm's '``fmod``'
	for some targets, and using the instruction may thus require linking libm.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``frem``' instruction must be
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of
floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point remainder of the two operands.
This is the same output as a libm '``fmod``' function, but without any
possibility of setting ``errno``. The remainder has the same sign as the
dividend.
This instruction is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>`.
This instruction can also take any number of :ref:`fast-math
flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable otherwise
unsafe floating-point optimizations:

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = frem float 4.0, %var          ; yields float:result = 4.0 % %var

.. _bitwiseops:

Bitwise Binary Operations
-------------------------

Bitwise binary operators are used to do various forms of bit-twiddling
in a program. They are generally very efficient instructions and can
commonly be strength reduced from other instructions. They require two
operands of the same type, execute an operation on them, and produce a
single value. The resulting value is the same type as its operands.

.. _i_shl:

'``shl``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = shl <ty> <op1>, <op2>           ; yields ty:result
      <result> = shl nuw <ty> <op1>, <op2>       ; yields ty:result
      <result> = shl nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>       ; yields ty:result
      <result> = shl nuw nsw <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``shl``' instruction returns the first operand shifted to the left
a specified number of bits.

Arguments:
""""""""""

Both arguments to the '``shl``' instruction must be the same
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer type.
'``op2``' is treated as an unsigned value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is ``op1`` \* 2\ :sup:`op2` mod 2\ :sup:`n`,
where ``n`` is the width of the result. If ``op2`` is (statically or
dynamically) equal to or larger than the number of bits in
``op1``, this instruction returns a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.
If the arguments are vectors, each vector element of ``op1`` is shifted
by the corresponding shift amount in ``op2``.

If the ``nuw`` keyword is present, then the shift produces a poison
value if it shifts out any non-zero bits.
If the ``nsw`` keyword is present, then the shift produces a poison
value if it shifts out any bits that disagree with the resultant sign bit.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = shl i32 4, %var   ; yields i32: 4 << %var
      <result> = shl i32 4, 2      ; yields i32: 16
      <result> = shl i32 1, 10     ; yields i32: 1024
      <result> = shl i32 1, 32     ; undefined
      <result> = shl <2 x i32> < i32 1, i32 1>, < i32 1, i32 2>   ; yields: result=<2 x i32> < i32 2, i32 4>

.. _i_lshr:


'``lshr``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = lshr <ty> <op1>, <op2>         ; yields ty:result
      <result> = lshr exact <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``lshr``' instruction (logical shift right) returns the first
operand shifted to the right a specified number of bits with zero fill.

Arguments:
""""""""""

Both arguments to the '``lshr``' instruction must be the same
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer type.
'``op2``' is treated as an unsigned value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This instruction always performs a logical shift right operation. The
most significant bits of the result will be filled with zero bits after
the shift. If ``op2`` is (statically or dynamically) equal to or larger
than the number of bits in ``op1``, this instruction returns a :ref:`poison
value <poisonvalues>`. If the arguments are vectors, each vector element
of ``op1`` is shifted by the corresponding shift amount in ``op2``.

If the ``exact`` keyword is present, the result value of the ``lshr`` is
a poison value if any of the bits shifted out are non-zero.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = lshr i32 4, 1   ; yields i32:result = 2
      <result> = lshr i32 4, 2   ; yields i32:result = 1
      <result> = lshr i8  4, 3   ; yields i8:result = 0
      <result> = lshr i8 -2, 1   ; yields i8:result = 0x7F
      <result> = lshr i32 1, 32  ; undefined
      <result> = lshr <2 x i32> < i32 -2, i32 4>, < i32 1, i32 2>   ; yields: result=<2 x i32> < i32 0x7FFFFFFF, i32 1>

.. _i_ashr:

'``ashr``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = ashr <ty> <op1>, <op2>         ; yields ty:result
      <result> = ashr exact <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``ashr``' instruction (arithmetic shift right) returns the first
operand shifted to the right a specified number of bits with sign
extension.

Arguments:
""""""""""

Both arguments to the '``ashr``' instruction must be the same
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer type.
'``op2``' is treated as an unsigned value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This instruction always performs an arithmetic shift right operation,
The most significant bits of the result will be filled with the sign bit
of ``op1``. If ``op2`` is (statically or dynamically) equal to or larger
than the number of bits in ``op1``, this instruction returns a :ref:`poison
value <poisonvalues>`. If the arguments are vectors, each vector element
of ``op1`` is shifted by the corresponding shift amount in ``op2``.

If the ``exact`` keyword is present, the result value of the ``ashr`` is
a poison value if any of the bits shifted out are non-zero.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = ashr i32 4, 1   ; yields i32:result = 2
      <result> = ashr i32 4, 2   ; yields i32:result = 1
      <result> = ashr i8  4, 3   ; yields i8:result = 0
      <result> = ashr i8 -2, 1   ; yields i8:result = -1
      <result> = ashr i32 1, 32  ; undefined
      <result> = ashr <2 x i32> < i32 -2, i32 4>, < i32 1, i32 3>   ; yields: result=<2 x i32> < i32 -1, i32 0>

.. _i_and:

'``and``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = and <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``and``' instruction returns the bitwise logical and of its two
operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``and``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The truth table used for the '``and``' instruction is:

+-----+-----+-----+
| In0 | In1 | Out |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   0 |   0 |   0 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   0 |   1 |   0 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   1 |   0 |   0 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   1 |   1 |   1 |
+-----+-----+-----+

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = and i32 4, %var         ; yields i32:result = 4 & %var
      <result> = and i32 15, 40          ; yields i32:result = 8
      <result> = and i32 4, 8            ; yields i32:result = 0

.. _i_or:

'``or``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = or <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result
      <result> = or disjoint <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``or``' instruction returns the bitwise logical inclusive or of its
two operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``or``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The truth table used for the '``or``' instruction is:

+-----+-----+-----+
| In0 | In1 | Out |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   0 |   0 |   0 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   0 |   1 |   1 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   1 |   0 |   1 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   1 |   1 |   1 |
+-----+-----+-----+

``disjoint`` means that for each bit, that bit is zero in at least one of the
inputs. This allows the Or to be treated as an Add since no carry can occur from
any bit. If the disjoint keyword is present, the result value of the ``or`` is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if both inputs have a one in the same bit
position. For vectors, only the element containing the bit is poison.

Example:
""""""""

::

      <result> = or i32 4, %var         ; yields i32:result = 4 | %var
      <result> = or i32 15, 40          ; yields i32:result = 47
      <result> = or i32 4, 8            ; yields i32:result = 12

.. _i_xor:

'``xor``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = xor <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``xor``' instruction returns the bitwise logical exclusive or of
its two operands. The ``xor`` is used to implement the "one's
complement" operation, which is the "~" operator in C.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The two arguments to the '``xor``' instruction must be
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of integer values. Both
arguments must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The truth table used for the '``xor``' instruction is:

+-----+-----+-----+
| In0 | In1 | Out |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   0 |   0 |   0 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   0 |   1 |   1 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   1 |   0 |   1 |
+-----+-----+-----+
|   1 |   1 |   0 |
+-----+-----+-----+

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = xor i32 4, %var         ; yields i32:result = 4 ^ %var
      <result> = xor i32 15, 40          ; yields i32:result = 39
      <result> = xor i32 4, 8            ; yields i32:result = 12
      <result> = xor i32 %V, -1          ; yields i32:result = ~%V

Vector Operations
-----------------

LLVM supports several instructions to represent vector operations in a
target-independent manner. These instructions cover the element-access
and vector-specific operations needed to process vectors effectively.
While LLVM does directly support these vector operations, many
sophisticated algorithms will want to use target-specific intrinsics to
take full advantage of a specific target.

.. _i_extractelement:

'``extractelement``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = extractelement <n x <ty>> <val>, <ty2> <idx>  ; yields <ty>
      <result> = extractelement <vscale x n x <ty>> <val>, <ty2> <idx> ; yields <ty>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``extractelement``' instruction extracts a single scalar element
from a vector at a specified index.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first operand of an '``extractelement``' instruction is a value of
:ref:`vector <t_vector>` type. The second operand is an index indicating
the position from which to extract the element. The index may be a
variable of any integer type, and will be treated as an unsigned integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result is a scalar of the same type as the element type of ``val``.
Its value is the value at position ``idx`` of ``val``. If ``idx``
exceeds the length of ``val`` for a fixed-length vector, the result is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. For a scalable vector, if the value
of ``idx`` exceeds the runtime length of the vector, the result is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = extractelement <4 x i32> %vec, i32 0    ; yields i32

.. _i_insertelement:

'``insertelement``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = insertelement <n x <ty>> <val>, <ty> <elt>, <ty2> <idx>    ; yields <n x <ty>>
      <result> = insertelement <vscale x n x <ty>> <val>, <ty> <elt>, <ty2> <idx> ; yields <vscale x n x <ty>>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``insertelement``' instruction inserts a scalar element into a
vector at a specified index.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first operand of an '``insertelement``' instruction is a value of
:ref:`vector <t_vector>` type. The second operand is a scalar value whose
type must equal the element type of the first operand. The third operand
is an index indicating the position at which to insert the value. The
index may be a variable of any integer type, and will be treated as an
unsigned integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result is a vector of the same type as ``val``. Its element values
are those of ``val`` except at position ``idx``, where it gets the value
``elt``. If ``idx`` exceeds the length of ``val`` for a fixed-length vector,
the result is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. For a scalable vector,
if the value of ``idx`` exceeds the runtime length of the vector, the result
is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = insertelement <4 x i32> %vec, i32 1, i32 0    ; yields <4 x i32>

.. _i_shufflevector:

'``shufflevector``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = shufflevector <n x <ty>> <v1>, <n x <ty>> <v2>, <m x i32> <mask>    ; yields <m x <ty>>
      <result> = shufflevector <vscale x n x <ty>> <v1>, <vscale x n x <ty>> v2, <vscale x m x i32> <mask>  ; yields <vscale x m x <ty>>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``shufflevector``' instruction constructs a permutation of elements
from two input vectors, returning a vector with the same element type as
the input and length that is the same as the shuffle mask.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two operands of a '``shufflevector``' instruction are vectors
with the same type. The third argument is a shuffle mask vector constant
whose element type is ``i32``. The mask vector elements must be constant
integers or ``poison`` values. The result of the instruction is a vector
whose length is the same as the shuffle mask and whose element type is the
same as the element type of the first two operands.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The elements of the two input vectors are numbered from left to right
across both of the vectors. For each element of the result vector, the
shuffle mask selects an element from one of the input vectors to copy
to the result. Non-negative elements in the mask represent an index
into the concatenated pair of input vectors.

A ``poison`` element in the mask vector specifies that the resulting element
is ``poison``.
For backwards-compatibility reasons, LLVM temporarily also accepts ``undef``
mask elements, which will be interpreted the same way as ``poison`` elements.
If the shuffle mask selects an ``undef`` element from one of the input
vectors, the resulting element is ``undef``.

For scalable vectors, the only valid mask values at present are
``zeroinitializer``, ``undef`` and ``poison``, since we cannot write all indices as
literals for a vector with a length unknown at compile time.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = shufflevector <4 x i32> %v1, <4 x i32> %v2,
                              <4 x i32> <i32 0, i32 4, i32 1, i32 5>  ; yields <4 x i32>
      <result> = shufflevector <4 x i32> %v1, <4 x i32> poison,
                              <4 x i32> <i32 0, i32 1, i32 2, i32 3>  ; yields <4 x i32> - Identity shuffle.
      <result> = shufflevector <8 x i32> %v1, <8 x i32> poison,
                              <4 x i32> <i32 0, i32 1, i32 2, i32 3>  ; yields <4 x i32>
      <result> = shufflevector <4 x i32> %v1, <4 x i32> %v2,
                              <8 x i32> <i32 0, i32 1, i32 2, i32 3, i32 4, i32 5, i32 6, i32 7 >  ; yields <8 x i32>

Aggregate Operations
--------------------

LLVM supports several instructions for working with
:ref:`aggregate <t_aggregate>` values.

.. _i_extractvalue:

'``extractvalue``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = extractvalue <aggregate type> <val>, <idx>{, <idx>}*

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``extractvalue``' instruction extracts the value of a member field
from an :ref:`aggregate <t_aggregate>` value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first operand of an '``extractvalue``' instruction is a value of
:ref:`struct <t_struct>` or :ref:`array <t_array>` type. The other operands are
constant indices to specify which value to extract in a similar manner
as indices in a '``getelementptr``' instruction.

The major differences to ``getelementptr`` indexing are:

-  Since the value being indexed is not a pointer, the first index is
   omitted and assumed to be zero.
-  At least one index must be specified.
-  Not only struct indices but also array indices must be in bounds.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result is the value at the position in the aggregate specified by
the index operands.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = extractvalue {i32, float} %agg, 0    ; yields i32

.. _i_insertvalue:

'``insertvalue``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = insertvalue <aggregate type> <val>, <ty> <elt>, <idx>{, <idx>}*    ; yields <aggregate type>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``insertvalue``' instruction inserts a value into a member field in
an :ref:`aggregate <t_aggregate>` value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first operand of an '``insertvalue``' instruction is a value of
:ref:`struct <t_struct>` or :ref:`array <t_array>` type. The second operand is
a first-class value to insert. The following operands are constant
indices indicating the position at which to insert the value in a
similar manner as indices in a '``extractvalue``' instruction. The value
to insert must have the same type as the value identified by the
indices.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result is an aggregate of the same type as ``val``. Its value is
that of ``val`` except that the value at the position specified by the
indices is that of ``elt``.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %agg1 = insertvalue {i32, float} undef, i32 1, 0              ; yields {i32 1, float undef}
      %agg2 = insertvalue {i32, float} %agg1, float %val, 1         ; yields {i32 1, float %val}
      %agg3 = insertvalue {i32, {float}} undef, float %val, 1, 0    ; yields {i32 undef, {float %val}}

.. _memoryops:

Memory Access and Addressing Operations
---------------------------------------

A key design point of an SSA-based representation is how it represents
memory. In LLVM, no memory locations are in SSA form, which makes things
very simple. This section describes how to read, write, and allocate
memory in LLVM.

.. _i_alloca:

'``alloca``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = alloca [inalloca] <type> [, <ty> <NumElements>] [, align <alignment>] [, addrspace(<num>)]     ; yields type addrspace(num)*:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``alloca``' instruction allocates memory on the stack frame of the
currently executing function, to be automatically released when this
function returns to its caller.  If the address space is not explicitly
specified, the object is allocated in the alloca address space from the
:ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>`.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``alloca``' instruction allocates ``sizeof(<type>)*NumElements``
bytes of memory on the runtime stack, returning a pointer of the
appropriate type to the program. If "NumElements" is specified, it is
the number of elements allocated, otherwise "NumElements" is defaulted
to be one.

If a constant alignment is specified, the value result of the
allocation is guaranteed to be aligned to at least that boundary. The
alignment may not be greater than ``1 << 32``.

The alignment is only optional when parsing textual IR; for in-memory IR,
it is always present. If not specified, the target can choose to align the
allocation on any convenient boundary compatible with the type.

'``type``' may be any sized type.

Structs containing scalable vectors cannot be used in allocas unless all
fields are the same scalable vector type (e.g. ``{<vscale x 2 x i32>,
<vscale x 2 x i32>}`` contains the same type while ``{<vscale x 2 x i32>,
<vscale x 2 x i64>}`` doesn't).

Semantics:
""""""""""

Memory is allocated; a pointer is returned. The allocated memory is
uninitialized, and loading from uninitialized memory produces an undefined
value. The operation itself is undefined if there is insufficient stack
space for the allocation.'``alloca``'d memory is automatically released
when the function returns. The '``alloca``' instruction is commonly used
to represent automatic variables that must have an address available. When
the function returns (either with the ``ret`` or ``resume`` instructions),
the memory is reclaimed. Allocating zero bytes is legal, but the returned
pointer may not be unique. The order in which memory is allocated (ie.,
which way the stack grows) is not specified.

Note that '``alloca``' outside of the alloca address space from the
:ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>` is meaningful only if the
target has assigned it a semantics.

If the returned pointer is used by :ref:`llvm.lifetime.start <int_lifestart>`,
the returned object is initially dead.
See :ref:`llvm.lifetime.start <int_lifestart>` and
:ref:`llvm.lifetime.end <int_lifeend>` for the precise semantics of
lifetime-manipulating intrinsics.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %ptr = alloca i32                             ; yields ptr
      %ptr = alloca i32, i32 4                      ; yields ptr
      %ptr = alloca i32, i32 4, align 1024          ; yields ptr
      %ptr = alloca i32, align 1024                 ; yields ptr

.. _i_load:

'``load``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = load [volatile] <ty>, ptr <pointer>[, align <alignment>][, !nontemporal !<nontemp_node>][, !invariant.load !<empty_node>][, !invariant.group !<empty_node>][, !nonnull !<empty_node>][, !dereferenceable !<deref_bytes_node>][, !dereferenceable_or_null !<deref_bytes_node>][, !align !<align_node>][, !noundef !<empty_node>]
      <result> = load atomic [volatile] <ty>, ptr <pointer> [syncscope("<target-scope>")] <ordering>, align <alignment> [, !invariant.group !<empty_node>]
      !<nontemp_node> = !{ i32 1 }
      !<empty_node> = !{}
      !<deref_bytes_node> = !{ i64 <dereferenceable_bytes> }
      !<align_node> = !{ i64 <value_alignment> }

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``load``' instruction is used to read from memory.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument to the ``load`` instruction specifies the memory address from which
to load. The type specified must be a :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type of
known size (i.e. not containing an :ref:`opaque structural type <t_opaque>`). If
the ``load`` is marked as ``volatile``, then the optimizer is not allowed to
modify the number or order of execution of this ``load`` with other
:ref:`volatile operations <volatile>`.

If the ``load`` is marked as ``atomic``, it takes an extra :ref:`ordering
<ordering>` and optional ``syncscope("<target-scope>")`` argument. The
``release`` and ``acq_rel`` orderings are not valid on ``load`` instructions.
Atomic loads produce :ref:`defined <memmodel>` results when they may see
multiple atomic stores. The type of the pointee must be an integer, pointer, or
floating-point type whose bit width is a power of two greater than or equal to
eight and less than or equal to a target-specific size limit.  ``align`` must be
explicitly specified on atomic loads. Note: if the alignment is not greater or
equal to the size of the `<value>` type, the atomic operation is likely to
require a lock and have poor performance. ``!nontemporal`` does not have any
defined semantics for atomic loads.

The optional constant ``align`` argument specifies the alignment of the
operation (that is, the alignment of the memory address). It is the
responsibility of the code emitter to ensure that the alignment information is
correct. Overestimating the alignment results in undefined behavior.
Underestimating the alignment may produce less efficient code. An alignment of
1 is always safe. The maximum possible alignment is ``1 << 32``. An alignment
value higher than the size of the loaded type implies memory up to the
alignment value bytes can be safely loaded without trapping in the default
address space. Access of the high bytes can interfere with debugging tools, so
should not be accessed if the function has the ``sanitize_thread`` or
``sanitize_address`` attributes.

The alignment is only optional when parsing textual IR; for in-memory IR, it is
always present. An omitted ``align`` argument means that the operation has the
ABI alignment for the target.

The optional ``!nontemporal`` metadata must reference a single
metadata name ``<nontemp_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with one
``i32`` entry of value 1. The existence of the ``!nontemporal``
metadata on the instruction tells the optimizer and code generator
that this load is not expected to be reused in the cache. The code
generator may select special instructions to save cache bandwidth, such
as the ``MOVNT`` instruction on x86.

The optional ``!invariant.load`` metadata must reference a single
metadata name ``<empty_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with no
entries. If a load instruction tagged with the ``!invariant.load``
metadata is executed, the memory location referenced by the load has
to contain the same value at all points in the program where the
memory location is dereferenceable; otherwise, the behavior is
undefined.

The optional ``!invariant.group`` metadata must reference a single metadata name
 ``<empty_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with no entries.
 See ``invariant.group`` metadata :ref:`invariant.group <md_invariant.group>`.

The optional ``!nonnull`` metadata must reference a single
metadata name ``<empty_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with no
entries. The existence of the ``!nonnull`` metadata on the
instruction tells the optimizer that the value loaded is known to
never be null. If the value is null at runtime, a poison value is returned
instead.  This is analogous to the ``nonnull`` attribute on parameters and
return values. This metadata can only be applied to loads of a pointer type.

The optional ``!dereferenceable`` metadata must reference a single metadata
name ``<deref_bytes_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with one ``i64``
entry.
See ``dereferenceable`` metadata :ref:`dereferenceable <md_dereferenceable>`.

The optional ``!dereferenceable_or_null`` metadata must reference a single
metadata name ``<deref_bytes_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with one
``i64`` entry.
See ``dereferenceable_or_null`` metadata :ref:`dereferenceable_or_null
<md_dereferenceable_or_null>`.

The optional ``!align`` metadata must reference a single metadata name
``<align_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with one ``i64`` entry.
The existence of the ``!align`` metadata on the instruction tells the
optimizer that the value loaded is known to be aligned to a boundary specified
by the integer value in the metadata node. The alignment must be a power of 2.
This is analogous to the ''align'' attribute on parameters and return values.
This metadata can only be applied to loads of a pointer type. If the returned
value is not appropriately aligned at runtime, a poison value is returned
instead.

The optional ``!noundef`` metadata must reference a single metadata name
``<empty_node>`` corresponding to a node with no entries. The existence of
``!noundef`` metadata on the instruction tells the optimizer that the value
loaded is known to be :ref:`well defined <welldefinedvalues>`.
If the value isn't well defined, the behavior is undefined. If the ``!noundef``
metadata is combined with poison-generating metadata like ``!nonnull``,
violation of that metadata constraint will also result in undefined behavior.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The location of memory pointed to is loaded. If the value being loaded
is of scalar type then the number of bytes read does not exceed the
minimum number of bytes needed to hold all bits of the type. For
example, loading an ``i24`` reads at most three bytes. When loading a
value of a type like ``i20`` with a size that is not an integral number
of bytes, the result is undefined if the value was not originally
written using a store of the same type.
If the value being loaded is of aggregate type, the bytes that correspond to
padding may be accessed but are ignored, because it is impossible to observe
padding from the loaded aggregate value.
If ``<pointer>`` is not a well-defined value, the behavior is undefined.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %ptr = alloca i32                               ; yields ptr
      store i32 3, ptr %ptr                           ; yields void
      %val = load i32, ptr %ptr                       ; yields i32:val = i32 3

.. _i_store:

'``store``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      store [volatile] <ty> <value>, ptr <pointer>[, align <alignment>][, !nontemporal !<nontemp_node>][, !invariant.group !<empty_node>]        ; yields void
      store atomic [volatile] <ty> <value>, ptr <pointer> [syncscope("<target-scope>")] <ordering>, align <alignment> [, !invariant.group !<empty_node>] ; yields void
      !<nontemp_node> = !{ i32 1 }
      !<empty_node> = !{}

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``store``' instruction is used to write to memory.

Arguments:
""""""""""

There are two arguments to the ``store`` instruction: a value to store and an
address at which to store it. The type of the ``<pointer>`` operand must be a
pointer to the :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type of the ``<value>``
operand. If the ``store`` is marked as ``volatile``, then the optimizer is not
allowed to modify the number or order of execution of this ``store`` with other
:ref:`volatile operations <volatile>`.  Only values of :ref:`first class
<t_firstclass>` types of known size (i.e. not containing an :ref:`opaque
structural type <t_opaque>`) can be stored.

If the ``store`` is marked as ``atomic``, it takes an extra :ref:`ordering
<ordering>` and optional ``syncscope("<target-scope>")`` argument. The
``acquire`` and ``acq_rel`` orderings aren't valid on ``store`` instructions.
Atomic loads produce :ref:`defined <memmodel>` results when they may see
multiple atomic stores. The type of the pointee must be an integer, pointer, or
floating-point type whose bit width is a power of two greater than or equal to
eight and less than or equal to a target-specific size limit.  ``align`` must be
explicitly specified on atomic stores. Note: if the alignment is not greater or
equal to the size of the `<value>` type, the atomic operation is likely to
require a lock and have poor performance. ``!nontemporal`` does not have any
defined semantics for atomic stores.

The optional constant ``align`` argument specifies the alignment of the
operation (that is, the alignment of the memory address). It is the
responsibility of the code emitter to ensure that the alignment information is
correct. Overestimating the alignment results in undefined behavior.
Underestimating the alignment may produce less efficient code. An alignment of
1 is always safe. The maximum possible alignment is ``1 << 32``. An alignment
value higher than the size of the loaded type implies memory up to the
alignment value bytes can be safely loaded without trapping in the default
address space. Access of the high bytes can interfere with debugging tools, so
should not be accessed if the function has the ``sanitize_thread`` or
``sanitize_address`` attributes.

The alignment is only optional when parsing textual IR; for in-memory IR, it is
always present. An omitted ``align`` argument means that the operation has the
ABI alignment for the target.

The optional ``!nontemporal`` metadata must reference a single metadata
name ``<nontemp_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with one ``i32`` entry
of value 1. The existence of the ``!nontemporal`` metadata on the instruction
tells the optimizer and code generator that this load is not expected to
be reused in the cache. The code generator may select special
instructions to save cache bandwidth, such as the ``MOVNT`` instruction on
x86.

The optional ``!invariant.group`` metadata must reference a
single metadata name ``<empty_node>``. See ``invariant.group`` metadata.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The contents of memory are updated to contain ``<value>`` at the
location specified by the ``<pointer>`` operand. If ``<value>`` is
of scalar type then the number of bytes written does not exceed the
minimum number of bytes needed to hold all bits of the type. For
example, storing an ``i24`` writes at most three bytes. When writing a
value of a type like ``i20`` with a size that is not an integral number
of bytes, it is unspecified what happens to the extra bits that do not
belong to the type, but they will typically be overwritten.
If ``<value>`` is of aggregate type, padding is filled with
:ref:`undef <undefvalues>`.
If ``<pointer>`` is not a well-defined value, the behavior is undefined.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %ptr = alloca i32                               ; yields ptr
      store i32 3, ptr %ptr                           ; yields void
      %val = load i32, ptr %ptr                       ; yields i32:val = i32 3

.. _i_fence:

'``fence``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      fence [syncscope("<target-scope>")] <ordering>  ; yields void

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fence``' instruction is used to introduce happens-before edges
between operations.

Arguments:
""""""""""

'``fence``' instructions take an :ref:`ordering <ordering>` argument which
defines what *synchronizes-with* edges they add. They can only be given
``acquire``, ``release``, ``acq_rel``, and ``seq_cst`` orderings.

Semantics:
""""""""""

A fence A which has (at least) ``release`` ordering semantics
*synchronizes with* a fence B with (at least) ``acquire`` ordering
semantics if and only if there exist atomic operations X and Y, both
operating on some atomic object M, such that A is sequenced before X, X
modifies M (either directly or through some side effect of a sequence
headed by X), Y is sequenced before B, and Y observes M. This provides a
*happens-before* dependency between A and B. Rather than an explicit
``fence``, one (but not both) of the atomic operations X or Y might
provide a ``release`` or ``acquire`` (resp.) ordering constraint and
still *synchronize-with* the explicit ``fence`` and establish the
*happens-before* edge.

A ``fence`` which has ``seq_cst`` ordering, in addition to having both
``acquire`` and ``release`` semantics specified above, participates in
the global program order of other ``seq_cst`` operations and/or
fences. Furthermore, the global ordering created by a ``seq_cst``
fence must be compatible with the individual total orders of
``monotonic`` (or stronger) memory accesses occurring before and after
such a fence. The exact semantics of this interaction are somewhat
complicated, see the C++ standard's `[atomics.order]
<https://wg21.link/atomics.order>`_ section for more details.

A ``fence`` instruction can also take an optional
":ref:`syncscope <syncscope>`" argument.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      fence acquire                                        ; yields void
      fence syncscope("singlethread") seq_cst              ; yields void
      fence syncscope("agent") seq_cst                     ; yields void

.. _i_cmpxchg:

'``cmpxchg``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      cmpxchg [weak] [volatile] ptr <pointer>, <ty> <cmp>, <ty> <new> [syncscope("<target-scope>")] <success ordering> <failure ordering>[, align <alignment>] ; yields  { ty, i1 }

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``cmpxchg``' instruction is used to atomically modify memory. It
loads a value in memory and compares it to a given value. If they are
equal, it tries to store a new value into the memory.

Arguments:
""""""""""

There are three arguments to the '``cmpxchg``' instruction: an address
to operate on, a value to compare to the value currently be at that
address, and a new value to place at that address if the compared values
are equal. The type of '<cmp>' must be an integer or pointer type whose
bit width is a power of two greater than or equal to eight and less
than or equal to a target-specific size limit. '<cmp>' and '<new>' must
have the same type, and the type of '<pointer>' must be a pointer to
that type. If the ``cmpxchg`` is marked as ``volatile``, then the
optimizer is not allowed to modify the number or order of execution of
this ``cmpxchg`` with other :ref:`volatile operations <volatile>`.

The success and failure :ref:`ordering <ordering>` arguments specify how this
``cmpxchg`` synchronizes with other atomic operations. Both ordering parameters
must be at least ``monotonic``, the failure ordering cannot be either
``release`` or ``acq_rel``.

A ``cmpxchg`` instruction can also take an optional
":ref:`syncscope <syncscope>`" argument.

Note: if the alignment is not greater or equal to the size of the `<value>`
type, the atomic operation is likely to require a lock and have poor
performance.

The alignment is only optional when parsing textual IR; for in-memory IR, it is
always present. If unspecified, the alignment is assumed to be equal to the
size of the '<value>' type. Note that this default alignment assumption is
different from the alignment used for the load/store instructions when align
isn't specified.

The pointer passed into cmpxchg must have alignment greater than or
equal to the size in memory of the operand.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The contents of memory at the location specified by the '``<pointer>``' operand
is read and compared to '``<cmp>``'; if the values are equal, '``<new>``' is
written to the location. The original value at the location is returned,
together with a flag indicating success (true) or failure (false).

If the cmpxchg operation is marked as ``weak`` then a spurious failure is
permitted: the operation may not write ``<new>`` even if the comparison
matched.

If the cmpxchg operation is strong (the default), the i1 value is 1 if and only
if the value loaded equals ``cmp``.

A successful ``cmpxchg`` is a read-modify-write instruction for the purpose of
identifying release sequences. A failed ``cmpxchg`` is equivalent to an atomic
load with an ordering parameter determined the second ordering parameter.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

    entry:
      %orig = load atomic i32, ptr %ptr unordered, align 4                      ; yields i32
      br label %loop

    loop:
      %cmp = phi i32 [ %orig, %entry ], [%value_loaded, %loop]
      %squared = mul i32 %cmp, %cmp
      %val_success = cmpxchg ptr %ptr, i32 %cmp, i32 %squared acq_rel monotonic ; yields  { i32, i1 }
      %value_loaded = extractvalue { i32, i1 } %val_success, 0
      %success = extractvalue { i32, i1 } %val_success, 1
      br i1 %success, label %done, label %loop

    done:
      ...

.. _i_atomicrmw:

'``atomicrmw``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      atomicrmw [volatile] <operation> ptr <pointer>, <ty> <value> [syncscope("<target-scope>")] <ordering>[, align <alignment>]  ; yields ty

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``atomicrmw``' instruction is used to atomically modify memory.

Arguments:
""""""""""

There are three arguments to the '``atomicrmw``' instruction: an
operation to apply, an address whose value to modify, an argument to the
operation. The operation must be one of the following keywords:

-  xchg
-  add
-  sub
-  and
-  nand
-  or
-  xor
-  max
-  min
-  umax
-  umin
-  fadd
-  fsub
-  fmax
-  fmin
-  uinc_wrap
-  udec_wrap

For most of these operations, the type of '<value>' must be an integer
type whose bit width is a power of two greater than or equal to eight
and less than or equal to a target-specific size limit. For xchg, this
may also be a floating point or a pointer type with the same size constraints
as integers.  For fadd/fsub/fmax/fmin, this must be a floating-point
or fixed vector of floating-point type.  The type of the '``<pointer>``'
operand must be a pointer to that type. If the ``atomicrmw`` is marked
as ``volatile``, then the optimizer is not allowed to modify the
number or order of execution of this ``atomicrmw`` with other
:ref:`volatile operations <volatile>`.

Note: if the alignment is not greater or equal to the size of the `<value>`
type, the atomic operation is likely to require a lock and have poor
performance.

The alignment is only optional when parsing textual IR; for in-memory IR, it is
always present. If unspecified, the alignment is assumed to be equal to the
size of the '<value>' type. Note that this default alignment assumption is
different from the alignment used for the load/store instructions when align
isn't specified.

A ``atomicrmw`` instruction can also take an optional
":ref:`syncscope <syncscope>`" argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The contents of memory at the location specified by the '``<pointer>``'
operand are atomically read, modified, and written back. The original
value at the location is returned. The modification is specified by the
operation argument:

-  xchg: ``*ptr = val``
-  add: ``*ptr = *ptr + val``
-  sub: ``*ptr = *ptr - val``
-  and: ``*ptr = *ptr & val``
-  nand: ``*ptr = ~(*ptr & val)``
-  or: ``*ptr = *ptr | val``
-  xor: ``*ptr = *ptr ^ val``
-  max: ``*ptr = *ptr > val ? *ptr : val`` (using a signed comparison)
-  min: ``*ptr = *ptr < val ? *ptr : val`` (using a signed comparison)
-  umax: ``*ptr = *ptr > val ? *ptr : val`` (using an unsigned comparison)
-  umin: ``*ptr = *ptr < val ? *ptr : val`` (using an unsigned comparison)
- fadd: ``*ptr = *ptr + val`` (using floating point arithmetic)
- fsub: ``*ptr = *ptr - val`` (using floating point arithmetic)
-  fmax: ``*ptr = maxnum(*ptr, val)`` (match the `llvm.maxnum.*`` intrinsic)
-  fmin: ``*ptr = minnum(*ptr, val)`` (match the `llvm.minnum.*`` intrinsic)
-  uinc_wrap: ``*ptr = (*ptr u>= val) ? 0 : (*ptr + 1)`` (increment value with wraparound to zero when incremented above input value)
-  udec_wrap: ``*ptr = ((*ptr == 0) || (*ptr u> val)) ? val : (*ptr - 1)`` (decrement with wraparound to input value when decremented below zero).


Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %old = atomicrmw add ptr %ptr, i32 1 acquire                        ; yields i32

.. _i_getelementptr:

'``getelementptr``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = getelementptr <ty>, ptr <ptrval>{, <ty> <idx>}*
      <result> = getelementptr inbounds <ty>, ptr <ptrval>{, <ty> <idx>}*
      <result> = getelementptr nusw <ty>, ptr <ptrval>{, <ty> <idx>}*
      <result> = getelementptr nuw <ty>, ptr <ptrval>{, <ty> <idx>}*
      <result> = getelementptr inrange(S,E) <ty>, ptr <ptrval>{, <ty> <idx>}*
      <result> = getelementptr <ty>, <N x ptr> <ptrval>, <vector index type> <idx>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``getelementptr``' instruction is used to get the address of a
subelement of an :ref:`aggregate <t_aggregate>` data structure. It performs
address calculation only and does not access memory. The instruction can also
be used to calculate a vector of such addresses.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is always a type used as the basis for the calculations.
The second argument is always a pointer or a vector of pointers, and is the
base address to start from. The remaining arguments are indices
that indicate which of the elements of the aggregate object are indexed.
The interpretation of each index is dependent on the type being indexed
into. The first index always indexes the pointer value given as the
second argument, the second index indexes a value of the type pointed to
(not necessarily the value directly pointed to, since the first index
can be non-zero), etc. The first type indexed into must be a pointer
value, subsequent types can be arrays, vectors, and structs. Note that
subsequent types being indexed into can never be pointers, since that
would require loading the pointer before continuing calculation.

The type of each index argument depends on the type it is indexing into.
When indexing into a (optionally packed) structure, only ``i32`` integer
**constants** are allowed (when using a vector of indices they must all
be the **same** ``i32`` integer constant). When indexing into an array,
pointer or vector, integers of any width are allowed, and they are not
required to be constant. These integers are treated as signed values
where relevant.

For example, let's consider a C code fragment and how it gets compiled
to LLVM:

.. code-block:: c

    struct RT {
      char A;
      int B[10][20];
      char C;
    };
    struct ST {
      int X;
      double Y;
      struct RT Z;
    };

    int *foo(struct ST *s) {
      return &s[1].Z.B[5][13];
    }

The LLVM code generated by Clang is approximately:

.. code-block:: llvm

    %struct.RT = type { i8, [10 x [20 x i32]], i8 }
    %struct.ST = type { i32, double, %struct.RT }

    define ptr @foo(ptr %s) {
    entry:
      %arrayidx = getelementptr inbounds %struct.ST, ptr %s, i64 1, i32 2, i32 1, i64 5, i64 13
      ret ptr %arrayidx
    }

Semantics:
""""""""""

In the example above, the first index is indexing into the
'``%struct.ST*``' type, which is a pointer, yielding a '``%struct.ST``'
= '``{ i32, double, %struct.RT }``' type, a structure. The second index
indexes into the third element of the structure, yielding a
'``%struct.RT``' = '``{ i8 , [10 x [20 x i32]], i8 }``' type, another
structure. The third index indexes into the second element of the
structure, yielding a '``[10 x [20 x i32]]``' type, an array. The two
dimensions of the array are subscripted into, yielding an '``i32``'
type. The '``getelementptr``' instruction returns a pointer to this
element.

Note that it is perfectly legal to index partially through a structure,
returning a pointer to an inner element. Because of this, the LLVM code
for the given testcase is equivalent to:

.. code-block:: llvm

    define ptr @foo(ptr %s) {
      %t1 = getelementptr %struct.ST, ptr %s, i32 1
      %t2 = getelementptr %struct.ST, ptr %t1, i32 0, i32 2
      %t3 = getelementptr %struct.RT, ptr %t2, i32 0, i32 1
      %t4 = getelementptr [10 x [20 x i32]], ptr %t3, i32 0, i32 5
      %t5 = getelementptr [20 x i32], ptr %t4, i32 0, i32 13
      ret ptr %t5
    }

The indices are first converted to offsets in the pointer's index type. If the
currently indexed type is a struct type, the struct offset corresponding to the
index is sign-extended or truncated to the pointer index type. Otherwise, the
index itself is sign-extended or truncated, and then multiplied by the type
allocation size (that is, the size rounded up to the ABI alignment) of the
currently indexed type.

The offsets are then added to the low bits of the base address up to the index
type width, with silently-wrapping two's complement arithmetic. If the pointer
size is larger than the index size, this means that the bits outside the index
type width will not be affected.

The result value of the ``getelementptr`` may be outside the object pointed
to by the base pointer. The result value may not necessarily be used to access
memory though, even if it happens to point into allocated storage. See the
:ref:`Pointer Aliasing Rules <pointeraliasing>` section for more
information.

The ``getelementptr`` instruction may have a number of attributes that impose
additional rules. If any of the rules are violated, the result value is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. In cases where the base is a vector of
pointers, the attributes apply to each computation element-wise.

For ``nusw`` (no unsigned signed wrap):

 * If the type of an index is larger than the pointer index type, the
   truncation to the pointer index type preserves the signed value
   (``trunc nsw``).
 * The multiplication of an index by the type size does not wrap the pointer
   index type in a signed sense (``mul nsw``).
 * The successive addition of each offset (without adding the base address)
   does not wrap the pointer index type in a signed sense (``add nsw``).
 * The successive addition of the current address, truncated to the pointer
   index type and interpreted as an unsigned number, and each offset,
   interpreted as a signed number, does not wrap the pointer index type.

For ``nuw`` (no unsigned wrap):

 * If the type of an index is larger than the pointer index type, the
   truncation to the pointer index type preserves the unsigned value
   (``trunc nuw``).
 * The multiplication of an index by the type size does not wrap the pointer
   index type in an unsigned sense (``mul nuw``).
 * The successive addition of each offset (without adding the base address)
   does not wrap the pointer index type in an unsigned sense (``add nuw``).
 * The successive addition of the current address, truncated to the pointer
   index type and interpreted as an unsigned number, and each offset, also
   interpreted as an unsigned number, does not wrap the pointer index type
   (``add nuw``).

For ``inbounds`` all rules of the ``nusw`` attribute apply. Additionally,
if the ``getelementptr`` has any non-zero indices, the following rules apply:

 * The base pointer has an *in bounds* address of the allocated object that it
   is :ref:`based <pointeraliasing>` on. This means that it points into that
   allocated object, or to its end. Note that the object does not have to be
   live anymore; being in-bounds of a deallocated object is sufficient.
 * During the successive addition of offsets to the address, the resulting
   pointer must remain *in bounds* of the allocated object at each step.

Note that ``getelementptr`` with all-zero indices is always considered to be
``inbounds``, even if the base pointer does not point to an allocated object.
As a corollary, the only pointer in bounds of the null pointer in the default
address space is the null pointer itself.

These rules are based on the assumption that no allocated object may cross
the unsigned address space boundary, and no allocated object may be larger
than half the pointer index type space.

If ``inbounds`` is present on a ``getelementptr`` instruction, the ``nusw``
attribute will be automatically set as well. For this reason, the ``nusw``
will also not be printed in textual IR if ``inbounds`` is already present.

If the ``inrange(Start, End)`` attribute is present, loading from or
storing to any pointer derived from the ``getelementptr`` has undefined
behavior if the load or store would access memory outside the half-open range
``[Start, End)`` from the ``getelementptr`` expression result. The result of
a pointer comparison or ``ptrtoint`` (including ``ptrtoint``-like operations
involving memory) involving a pointer derived from a ``getelementptr`` with
the ``inrange`` keyword is undefined, with the exception of comparisons
in the case where both operands are in the closed range ``[Start, End]``.
Note that the ``inrange`` keyword is currently only allowed
in constant ``getelementptr`` expressions.

The getelementptr instruction is often confusing. For some more insight
into how it works, see :doc:`the getelementptr FAQ <GetElementPtr>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

        %aptr = getelementptr {i32, [12 x i8]}, ptr %saptr, i64 0, i32 1
        %vptr = getelementptr {i32, <2 x i8>}, ptr %svptr, i64 0, i32 1, i32 1
        %eptr = getelementptr [12 x i8], ptr %aptr, i64 0, i32 1
        %iptr = getelementptr [10 x i32], ptr @arr, i16 0, i16 0

Vector of pointers:
"""""""""""""""""""

The ``getelementptr`` returns a vector of pointers, instead of a single address,
when one or more of its arguments is a vector. In such cases, all vector
arguments should have the same number of elements, and every scalar argument
will be effectively broadcast into a vector during address calculation.

.. code-block:: llvm

     ; All arguments are vectors:
     ;   A[i] = ptrs[i] + offsets[i]*sizeof(i8)
     %A = getelementptr i8, <4 x i8*> %ptrs, <4 x i64> %offsets

     ; Add the same scalar offset to each pointer of a vector:
     ;   A[i] = ptrs[i] + offset*sizeof(i8)
     %A = getelementptr i8, <4 x ptr> %ptrs, i64 %offset

     ; Add distinct offsets to the same pointer:
     ;   A[i] = ptr + offsets[i]*sizeof(i8)
     %A = getelementptr i8, ptr %ptr, <4 x i64> %offsets

     ; In all cases described above the type of the result is <4 x ptr>

The two following instructions are equivalent:

.. code-block:: llvm

     getelementptr  %struct.ST, <4 x ptr> %s, <4 x i64> %ind1,
       <4 x i32> <i32 2, i32 2, i32 2, i32 2>,
       <4 x i32> <i32 1, i32 1, i32 1, i32 1>,
       <4 x i32> %ind4,
       <4 x i64> <i64 13, i64 13, i64 13, i64 13>

     getelementptr  %struct.ST, <4 x ptr> %s, <4 x i64> %ind1,
       i32 2, i32 1, <4 x i32> %ind4, i64 13

Let's look at the C code, where the vector version of ``getelementptr``
makes sense:

.. code-block:: c

    // Let's assume that we vectorize the following loop:
    double *A, *B; int *C;
    for (int i = 0; i < size; ++i) {
      A[i] = B[C[i]];
    }

.. code-block:: llvm

    ; get pointers for 8 elements from array B
    %ptrs = getelementptr double, ptr %B, <8 x i32> %C
    ; load 8 elements from array B into A
    %A = call <8 x double> @llvm.masked.gather.v8f64.v8p0f64(<8 x ptr> %ptrs,
         i32 8, <8 x i1> %mask, <8 x double> %passthru)

Conversion Operations
---------------------

The instructions in this category are the conversion instructions
(casting) which all take a single operand and a type. They perform
various bit conversions on the operand.

.. _i_trunc:

'``trunc .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = trunc <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2
      <result> = trunc nsw <ty> <value> to <ty2>         ; yields ty2
      <result> = trunc nuw <ty> <value> to <ty2>         ; yields ty2
      <result> = trunc nuw nsw <ty> <value> to <ty2>     ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``trunc``' instruction truncates its operand to the type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``trunc``' instruction takes a value to trunc, and a type to trunc
it to. Both types must be of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` types, or vectors
of the same number of integers. The bit size of the ``value`` must be
larger than the bit size of the destination type, ``ty2``. Equal sized
types are not allowed.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``trunc``' instruction truncates the high order bits in ``value``
and converts the remaining bits to ``ty2``. Since the source size must
be larger than the destination size, ``trunc`` cannot be a *no-op cast*.
It will always truncate bits.

If the ``nuw`` keyword is present, and any of the truncated bits are non-zero,
the result is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. If the ``nsw`` keyword
is present, and any of the truncated bits are not the same as the top bit
of the truncation result, the result is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = trunc i32 257 to i8                        ; yields i8:1
      %Y = trunc i32 123 to i1                        ; yields i1:true
      %Z = trunc i32 122 to i1                        ; yields i1:false
      %W = trunc <2 x i16> <i16 8, i16 7> to <2 x i8> ; yields <i8 8, i8 7>

.. _i_zext:

'``zext .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = zext <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``zext``' instruction zero extends its operand to type ``ty2``.

The ``nneg`` (non-negative) flag, if present, specifies that the operand is
non-negative. This property may be used by optimization passes to later
convert the ``zext`` into a ``sext``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``zext``' instruction takes a value to cast, and a type to cast it
to. Both types must be of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` types, or vectors of
the same number of integers. The bit size of the ``value`` must be
smaller than the bit size of the destination type, ``ty2``.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``zext`` fills the high order bits of the ``value`` with zero bits
until it reaches the size of the destination type, ``ty2``.

When zero extending from i1, the result will always be either 0 or 1.

If the ``nneg`` flag is set, and the ``zext`` argument is negative, the result
is a poison value.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = zext i32 257 to i64              ; yields i64:257
      %Y = zext i1 true to i32              ; yields i32:1
      %Z = zext <2 x i16> <i16 8, i16 7> to <2 x i32> ; yields <i32 8, i32 7>

      %a = zext nneg i8 127 to i16 ; yields i16 127
      %b = zext nneg i8 -1 to i16  ; yields i16 poison

.. _i_sext:

'``sext .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = sext <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``sext``' sign extends ``value`` to the type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``sext``' instruction takes a value to cast, and a type to cast it
to. Both types must be of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` types, or vectors of
the same number of integers. The bit size of the ``value`` must be
smaller than the bit size of the destination type, ``ty2``.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``sext``' instruction performs a sign extension by copying the sign
bit (highest order bit) of the ``value`` until it reaches the bit size
of the type ``ty2``.

When sign extending from i1, the extension always results in -1 or 0.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = sext i8  -1 to i16              ; yields i16   :65535
      %Y = sext i1 true to i32             ; yields i32:-1
      %Z = sext <2 x i16> <i16 8, i16 7> to <2 x i32> ; yields <i32 8, i32 7>

'``fptrunc .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fptrunc <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fptrunc``' instruction truncates ``value`` to type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``fptrunc``' instruction takes a :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>`
value to cast and a :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type to cast it to.
The size of ``value`` must be larger than the size of ``ty2``. This
implies that ``fptrunc`` cannot be used to make a *no-op cast*.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``fptrunc``' instruction casts a ``value`` from a larger
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type to a smaller :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` type.
This instruction is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>`.

NaN values follow the usual :ref:`NaN behaviors <floatnan>`, except that _if_ a
NaN payload is propagated from the input ("Quieting NaN propagation" or
"Unchanged NaN propagation" cases), then the low order bits of the NaN payload
which cannot fit in the resulting type are discarded. Note that if discarding
the low order bits leads to an all-0 payload, this cannot be represented as a
signaling NaN (it would represent an infinity instead), so in that case
"Unchanged NaN propagation" is not possible.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = fptrunc double 16777217.0 to float    ; yields float:16777216.0
      %Y = fptrunc double 1.0E+300 to half       ; yields half:+infinity

'``fpext .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fpext <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fpext``' extends a floating-point ``value`` to a larger floating-point
value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``fpext``' instruction takes a :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>`
``value`` to cast, and a :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type to cast it
to. The source type must be smaller than the destination type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``fpext``' instruction extends the ``value`` from a smaller
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type to a larger :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` type. The ``fpext`` cannot be used to make a
*no-op cast* because it always changes bits. Use ``bitcast`` to make a
*no-op cast* for a floating-point cast.

NaN values follow the usual :ref:`NaN behaviors <floatnan>`, except that _if_ a
NaN payload is propagated from the input ("Quieting NaN propagation" or
"Unchanged NaN propagation" cases), then it is copied to the high order bits of
the resulting payload, and the remaining low order bits are zero.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = fpext float 3.125 to double         ; yields double:3.125000e+00
      %Y = fpext double %X to fp128            ; yields fp128:0xL00000000000000004000900000000000

'``fptoui .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fptoui <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fptoui``' converts a floating-point ``value`` to its unsigned
integer equivalent of type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``fptoui``' instruction takes a value to cast, which must be a
scalar or vector :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` value, and a type to
cast it to ``ty2``, which must be an :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type. If
``ty`` is a vector floating-point type, ``ty2`` must be a vector integer
type with the same number of elements as ``ty``

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``fptoui``' instruction converts its :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` operand into the nearest (rounding towards zero)
unsigned integer value. If the value cannot fit in ``ty2``, the result
is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = fptoui double 123.0 to i32      ; yields i32:123
      %Y = fptoui float 1.0E+300 to i1     ; yields undefined:1
      %Z = fptoui float 1.04E+17 to i8     ; yields undefined:1

'``fptosi .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fptosi <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fptosi``' instruction converts :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>`
``value`` to type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``fptosi``' instruction takes a value to cast, which must be a
scalar or vector :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` value, and a type to
cast it to ``ty2``, which must be an :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type. If
``ty`` is a vector floating-point type, ``ty2`` must be a vector integer
type with the same number of elements as ``ty``

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``fptosi``' instruction converts its :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` operand into the nearest (rounding towards zero)
signed integer value. If the value cannot fit in ``ty2``, the result
is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = fptosi double -123.0 to i32      ; yields i32:-123
      %Y = fptosi float 1.0E-247 to i1      ; yields undefined:1
      %Z = fptosi float 1.04E+17 to i8      ; yields undefined:1

'``uitofp .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = uitofp <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``uitofp``' instruction regards ``value`` as an unsigned integer
and converts that value to the ``ty2`` type.

The ``nneg`` (non-negative) flag, if present, specifies that the
operand is non-negative. This property may be used by optimization
passes to later convert the ``uitofp`` into a ``sitofp``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``uitofp``' instruction takes a value to cast, which must be a
scalar or vector :ref:`integer <t_integer>` value, and a type to cast it to
``ty2``, which must be an :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type. If
``ty`` is a vector integer type, ``ty2`` must be a vector floating-point
type with the same number of elements as ``ty``

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``uitofp``' instruction interprets its operand as an unsigned
integer quantity and converts it to the corresponding floating-point
value. If the value cannot be exactly represented, it is rounded using
the default rounding mode.

If the ``nneg`` flag is set, and the ``uitofp`` argument is negative,
the result is a poison value.


Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = uitofp i32 257 to float         ; yields float:257.0
      %Y = uitofp i8 -1 to double          ; yields double:255.0

      %a = uitofp nneg i32 256 to i32      ; yields float:256.0
      %b = uitofp nneg i32 -256 to i32     ; yields i32 poison

'``sitofp .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = sitofp <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``sitofp``' instruction regards ``value`` as a signed integer and
converts that value to the ``ty2`` type.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``sitofp``' instruction takes a value to cast, which must be a
scalar or vector :ref:`integer <t_integer>` value, and a type to cast it to
``ty2``, which must be an :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type. If
``ty`` is a vector integer type, ``ty2`` must be a vector floating-point
type with the same number of elements as ``ty``

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``sitofp``' instruction interprets its operand as a signed integer
quantity and converts it to the corresponding floating-point value. If the
value cannot be exactly represented, it is rounded using the default rounding
mode.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = sitofp i32 257 to float         ; yields float:257.0
      %Y = sitofp i8 -1 to double          ; yields double:-1.0

.. _i_ptrtoint:

'``ptrtoint .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = ptrtoint <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``ptrtoint``' instruction converts the pointer or a vector of
pointers ``value`` to the integer (or vector of integers) type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``ptrtoint``' instruction takes a ``value`` to cast, which must be
a value of type :ref:`pointer <t_pointer>` or a vector of pointers, and a
type to cast it to ``ty2``, which must be an :ref:`integer <t_integer>` or
a vector of integers type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``ptrtoint``' instruction converts ``value`` to integer type
``ty2`` by interpreting the pointer value as an integer and either
truncating or zero extending that value to the size of the integer type.
If ``value`` is smaller than ``ty2`` then a zero extension is done. If
``value`` is larger than ``ty2`` then a truncation is done. If they are
the same size, then nothing is done (*no-op cast*) other than a type
change.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = ptrtoint ptr %P to i8                         ; yields truncation on 32-bit architecture
      %Y = ptrtoint ptr %P to i64                        ; yields zero extension on 32-bit architecture
      %Z = ptrtoint <4 x ptr> %P to <4 x i64>; yields vector zero extension for a vector of addresses on 32-bit architecture

.. _i_inttoptr:

'``inttoptr .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = inttoptr <ty> <value> to <ty2>[, !dereferenceable !<deref_bytes_node>][, !dereferenceable_or_null !<deref_bytes_node>]             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``inttoptr``' instruction converts an integer ``value`` to a
pointer type, ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``inttoptr``' instruction takes an :ref:`integer <t_integer>` value to
cast, and a type to cast it to, which must be a :ref:`pointer <t_pointer>`
type.

The optional ``!dereferenceable`` metadata must reference a single metadata
name ``<deref_bytes_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with one ``i64``
entry.
See ``dereferenceable`` metadata.

The optional ``!dereferenceable_or_null`` metadata must reference a single
metadata name ``<deref_bytes_node>`` corresponding to a metadata node with one
``i64`` entry.
See ``dereferenceable_or_null`` metadata.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``inttoptr``' instruction converts ``value`` to type ``ty2`` by
applying either a zero extension or a truncation depending on the size
of the integer ``value``. If ``value`` is larger than the size of a
pointer then a truncation is done. If ``value`` is smaller than the size
of a pointer then a zero extension is done. If they are the same size,
nothing is done (*no-op cast*).

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = inttoptr i32 255 to ptr           ; yields zero extension on 64-bit architecture
      %Y = inttoptr i32 255 to ptr           ; yields no-op on 32-bit architecture
      %Z = inttoptr i64 0 to ptr             ; yields truncation on 32-bit architecture
      %Z = inttoptr <4 x i32> %G to <4 x ptr>; yields truncation of vector G to four pointers

.. _i_bitcast:

'``bitcast .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = bitcast <ty> <value> to <ty2>             ; yields ty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``bitcast``' instruction converts ``value`` to type ``ty2`` without
changing any bits.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``bitcast``' instruction takes a value to cast, which must be a
non-aggregate first class value, and a type to cast it to, which must
also be a non-aggregate :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type. The
bit sizes of ``value`` and the destination type, ``ty2``, must be
identical. If the source type is a pointer, the destination type must
also be a pointer of the same size. This instruction supports bitwise
conversion of vectors to integers and to vectors of other types (as
long as they have the same size).

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``bitcast``' instruction converts ``value`` to type ``ty2``. It
is always a *no-op cast* because no bits change with this
conversion. The conversion is done as if the ``value`` had been stored
to memory and read back as type ``ty2``. Pointer (or vector of
pointers) types may only be converted to other pointer (or vector of
pointers) types with the same address space through this instruction.
To convert pointers to other types, use the :ref:`inttoptr <i_inttoptr>`
or :ref:`ptrtoint <i_ptrtoint>` instructions first.

There is a caveat for bitcasts involving vector types in relation to
endianness. For example ``bitcast <2 x i8> <value> to i16`` puts element zero
of the vector in the least significant bits of the i16 for little-endian while
element zero ends up in the most significant bits for big-endian.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      %X = bitcast i8 255 to i8         ; yields i8 :-1
      %Y = bitcast i32* %x to i16*      ; yields i16*:%x
      %Z = bitcast <2 x i32> %V to i64; ; yields i64: %V (depends on endianness)
      %Z = bitcast <2 x i32*> %V to <2 x i64*> ; yields <2 x i64*>

.. _i_addrspacecast:

'``addrspacecast .. to``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = addrspacecast <pty> <ptrval> to <pty2>       ; yields pty2

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``addrspacecast``' instruction converts ``ptrval`` from ``pty`` in
address space ``n`` to type ``pty2`` in address space ``m``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``addrspacecast``' instruction takes a pointer or vector of pointer value
to cast and a pointer type to cast it to, which must have a different
address space.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``addrspacecast``' instruction converts the pointer value
``ptrval`` to type ``pty2``. It can be a *no-op cast* or a complex
value modification, depending on the target and the address space
pair. Pointer conversions within the same address space must be
performed with the ``bitcast`` instruction. Note that if the address
space conversion produces a dereferenceable result then both result
and operand refer to the same memory location. The conversion must
have no side effects, and must not capture the value of the pointer.

If the source is :ref:`poison <poisonvalues>`, the result is
:ref:`poison <poisonvalues>`.

If the source is not :ref:`poison <poisonvalues>`, and both source and
destination are :ref:`integral pointers <nointptrtype>`, and the
result pointer is dereferenceable, the cast is assumed to be
reversible (i.e. casting the result back to the original address space
should yield the original bit pattern).

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = addrspacecast ptr %x to ptr addrspace(1)
      %Y = addrspacecast ptr addrspace(1) %y to ptr addrspace(2)
      %Z = addrspacecast <4 x ptr> %z to <4 x ptr addrspace(3)>

.. _otherops:

Other Operations
----------------

The instructions in this category are the "miscellaneous" instructions,
which defy better classification.

.. _i_icmp:

'``icmp``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = icmp <cond> <ty> <op1>, <op2>   ; yields i1 or <N x i1>:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``icmp``' instruction returns a boolean value or a vector of
boolean values based on comparison of its two integer, integer vector,
pointer, or pointer vector operands.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``icmp``' instruction takes three operands. The first operand is
the condition code indicating the kind of comparison to perform. It is
not a value, just a keyword. The possible condition codes are:

.. _icmp_md_cc:

#. ``eq``: equal
#. ``ne``: not equal
#. ``ugt``: unsigned greater than
#. ``uge``: unsigned greater or equal
#. ``ult``: unsigned less than
#. ``ule``: unsigned less or equal
#. ``sgt``: signed greater than
#. ``sge``: signed greater or equal
#. ``slt``: signed less than
#. ``sle``: signed less or equal

The remaining two arguments must be :ref:`integer <t_integer>` or
:ref:`pointer <t_pointer>` or integer :ref:`vector <t_vector>` typed. They
must also be identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``icmp``' compares ``op1`` and ``op2`` according to the condition
code given as ``cond``. The comparison performed always yields either an
:ref:`i1 <t_integer>` or vector of ``i1`` result, as follows:

.. _icmp_md_cc_sem:

#. ``eq``: yields ``true`` if the operands are equal, ``false``
   otherwise. No sign interpretation is necessary or performed.
#. ``ne``: yields ``true`` if the operands are unequal, ``false``
   otherwise. No sign interpretation is necessary or performed.
#. ``ugt``: interprets the operands as unsigned values and yields
   ``true`` if ``op1`` is greater than ``op2``.
#. ``uge``: interprets the operands as unsigned values and yields
   ``true`` if ``op1`` is greater than or equal to ``op2``.
#. ``ult``: interprets the operands as unsigned values and yields
   ``true`` if ``op1`` is less than ``op2``.
#. ``ule``: interprets the operands as unsigned values and yields
   ``true`` if ``op1`` is less than or equal to ``op2``.
#. ``sgt``: interprets the operands as signed values and yields ``true``
   if ``op1`` is greater than ``op2``.
#. ``sge``: interprets the operands as signed values and yields ``true``
   if ``op1`` is greater than or equal to ``op2``.
#. ``slt``: interprets the operands as signed values and yields ``true``
   if ``op1`` is less than ``op2``.
#. ``sle``: interprets the operands as signed values and yields ``true``
   if ``op1`` is less than or equal to ``op2``.

If the operands are :ref:`pointer <t_pointer>` typed, the pointer values
are compared as if they were integers.

If the operands are integer vectors, then they are compared element by
element. The result is an ``i1`` vector with the same number of elements
as the values being compared. Otherwise, the result is an ``i1``.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = icmp eq i32 4, 5          ; yields: result=false
      <result> = icmp ne ptr %X, %X        ; yields: result=false
      <result> = icmp ult i16  4, 5        ; yields: result=true
      <result> = icmp sgt i16  4, 5        ; yields: result=false
      <result> = icmp ule i16 -4, 5        ; yields: result=false
      <result> = icmp sge i16  4, 5        ; yields: result=false

.. _i_fcmp:

'``fcmp``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = fcmp [fast-math flags]* <cond> <ty> <op1>, <op2>     ; yields i1 or <N x i1>:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``fcmp``' instruction returns a boolean value or vector of boolean
values based on comparison of its operands.

If the operands are floating-point scalars, then the result type is a
boolean (:ref:`i1 <t_integer>`).

If the operands are floating-point vectors, then the result type is a
vector of boolean with the same number of elements as the operands being
compared.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``fcmp``' instruction takes three operands. The first operand is
the condition code indicating the kind of comparison to perform. It is
not a value, just a keyword. The possible condition codes are:

#. ``false``: no comparison, always returns false
#. ``oeq``: ordered and equal
#. ``ogt``: ordered and greater than
#. ``oge``: ordered and greater than or equal
#. ``olt``: ordered and less than
#. ``ole``: ordered and less than or equal
#. ``one``: ordered and not equal
#. ``ord``: ordered (no nans)
#. ``ueq``: unordered or equal
#. ``ugt``: unordered or greater than
#. ``uge``: unordered or greater than or equal
#. ``ult``: unordered or less than
#. ``ule``: unordered or less than or equal
#. ``une``: unordered or not equal
#. ``uno``: unordered (either nans)
#. ``true``: no comparison, always returns true

*Ordered* means that neither operand is a QNAN while *unordered* means
that either operand may be a QNAN.

Each of ``val1`` and ``val2`` arguments must be either a :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` type or a :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of floating-point type.
They must have identical types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``fcmp``' instruction compares ``op1`` and ``op2`` according to the
condition code given as ``cond``. If the operands are vectors, then the
vectors are compared element by element. Each comparison performed
always yields an :ref:`i1 <t_integer>` result, as follows:

#. ``false``: always yields ``false``, regardless of operands.
#. ``oeq``: yields ``true`` if both operands are not a QNAN and ``op1``
   is equal to ``op2``.
#. ``ogt``: yields ``true`` if both operands are not a QNAN and ``op1``
   is greater than ``op2``.
#. ``oge``: yields ``true`` if both operands are not a QNAN and ``op1``
   is greater than or equal to ``op2``.
#. ``olt``: yields ``true`` if both operands are not a QNAN and ``op1``
   is less than ``op2``.
#. ``ole``: yields ``true`` if both operands are not a QNAN and ``op1``
   is less than or equal to ``op2``.
#. ``one``: yields ``true`` if both operands are not a QNAN and ``op1``
   is not equal to ``op2``.
#. ``ord``: yields ``true`` if both operands are not a QNAN.
#. ``ueq``: yields ``true`` if either operand is a QNAN or ``op1`` is
   equal to ``op2``.
#. ``ugt``: yields ``true`` if either operand is a QNAN or ``op1`` is
   greater than ``op2``.
#. ``uge``: yields ``true`` if either operand is a QNAN or ``op1`` is
   greater than or equal to ``op2``.
#. ``ult``: yields ``true`` if either operand is a QNAN or ``op1`` is
   less than ``op2``.
#. ``ule``: yields ``true`` if either operand is a QNAN or ``op1`` is
   less than or equal to ``op2``.
#. ``une``: yields ``true`` if either operand is a QNAN or ``op1`` is
   not equal to ``op2``.
#. ``uno``: yields ``true`` if either operand is a QNAN.
#. ``true``: always yields ``true``, regardless of operands.

The ``fcmp`` instruction can also optionally take any number of
:ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable
otherwise unsafe floating-point optimizations.

Any set of fast-math flags are legal on an ``fcmp`` instruction, but the
only flags that have any effect on its semantics are those that allow
assumptions to be made about the values of input arguments; namely
``nnan``, ``ninf``, and ``reassoc``. See :ref:`fastmath` for more information.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      <result> = fcmp oeq float 4.0, 5.0    ; yields: result=false
      <result> = fcmp one float 4.0, 5.0    ; yields: result=true
      <result> = fcmp olt float 4.0, 5.0    ; yields: result=true
      <result> = fcmp ueq double 1.0, 2.0   ; yields: result=false

.. _i_phi:

'``phi``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = phi [fast-math-flags] <ty> [ <val0>, <label0>], ...

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``phi``' instruction is used to implement the  node in the SSA
graph representing the function.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The type of the incoming values is specified with the first type field.
After this, the '``phi``' instruction takes a list of pairs as
arguments, with one pair for each predecessor basic block of the current
block. Only values of :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type may be used as
the value arguments to the PHI node. Only labels may be used as the
label arguments.

There must be no non-phi instructions between the start of a basic block
and the PHI instructions: i.e. PHI instructions must be first in a basic
block.

For the purposes of the SSA form, the use of each incoming value is
deemed to occur on the edge from the corresponding predecessor block to
the current block (but after any definition of an '``invoke``'
instruction's return value on the same edge).

The optional ``fast-math-flags`` marker indicates that the phi has one
or more :ref:`fast-math-flags <fastmath>`. These are optimization hints
to enable otherwise unsafe floating-point optimizations. Fast-math-flags
are only valid for phis that return a floating-point scalar or vector
type, or an array (nested to any depth) of floating-point scalar or vector
types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

At runtime, the '``phi``' instruction logically takes on the value
specified by the pair corresponding to the predecessor basic block that
executed just prior to the current block.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

    Loop:       ; Infinite loop that counts from 0 on up...
      %indvar = phi i32 [ 0, %LoopHeader ], [ %nextindvar, %Loop ]
      %nextindvar = add i32 %indvar, 1
      br label %Loop

.. _i_select:

'``select``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = select [fast-math flags] selty <cond>, <ty> <val1>, <ty> <val2>             ; yields ty

      selty is either i1 or {<N x i1>}

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``select``' instruction is used to choose one value based on a
condition, without IR-level branching.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``select``' instruction requires an 'i1' value or a vector of 'i1'
values indicating the condition, and two values of the same :ref:`first
class <t_firstclass>` type.

#. The optional ``fast-math flags`` marker indicates that the select has one or more
   :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`. These are optimization hints to enable
   otherwise unsafe floating-point optimizations. Fast-math flags are only valid
   for selects that return a floating-point scalar or vector type, or an array
   (nested to any depth) of floating-point scalar or vector types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

If the condition is an i1 and it evaluates to 1, the instruction returns
the first value argument; otherwise, it returns the second value
argument.

If the condition is a vector of i1, then the value arguments must be
vectors of the same size, and the selection is done element by element.

If the condition is an i1 and the value arguments are vectors of the
same size, then an entire vector is selected.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %X = select i1 true, i8 17, i8 42          ; yields i8:17


.. _i_freeze:

'``freeze``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = freeze ty <val>    ; yields ty:result

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``freeze``' instruction is used to stop propagation of
:ref:`undef <undefvalues>` and :ref:`poison <poisonvalues>` values.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``freeze``' instruction takes a single argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

If the argument is ``undef`` or ``poison``, '``freeze``' returns an
arbitrary, but fixed, value of type '``ty``'.
Otherwise, this instruction is a no-op and returns the input argument.
All uses of a value returned by the same '``freeze``' instruction are
guaranteed to always observe the same value, while different '``freeze``'
instructions may yield different values.

While ``undef`` and ``poison`` pointers can be frozen, the result is a
non-dereferenceable pointer. See the
:ref:`Pointer Aliasing Rules <pointeraliasing>` section for more information.
If an aggregate value or vector is frozen, the operand is frozen element-wise.
The padding of an aggregate isn't considered, since it isn't visible
without storing it into memory and loading it with a different type.


Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      %w = i32 undef
      %x = freeze i32 %w
      %y = add i32 %w, %w         ; undef
      %z = add i32 %x, %x         ; even number because all uses of %x observe
                                  ; the same value
      %x2 = freeze i32 %w
      %cmp = icmp eq i32 %x, %x2  ; can be true or false

      ; example with vectors
      %v = <2 x i32> <i32 undef, i32 poison>
      %a = extractelement <2 x i32> %v, i32 0    ; undef
      %b = extractelement <2 x i32> %v, i32 1    ; poison
      %add = add i32 %a, %a                      ; undef

      %v.fr = freeze <2 x i32> %v                ; element-wise freeze
      %d = extractelement <2 x i32> %v.fr, i32 0 ; not undef
      %add.f = add i32 %d, %d                    ; even number

      ; branching on frozen value
      %poison = add nsw i1 %k, undef   ; poison
      %c = freeze i1 %poison
      br i1 %c, label %foo, label %bar ; non-deterministic branch to %foo or %bar


.. _i_call:

'``call``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <result> = [tail | musttail | notail ] call [fast-math flags] [cconv] [ret attrs] [addrspace(<num>)]
                 <ty>|<fnty> <fnptrval>(<function args>) [fn attrs] [ operand bundles ]

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``call``' instruction represents a simple function call.

Arguments:
""""""""""

This instruction requires several arguments:

#. The optional ``tail`` and ``musttail`` markers indicate that the optimizers
   should perform tail call optimization. The ``tail`` marker is a hint that
   `can be ignored <CodeGenerator.html#tail-call-optimization>`_. The
   ``musttail`` marker means that the call must be tail call optimized in order
   for the program to be correct. This is true even in the presence of
   attributes like "disable-tail-calls". The ``musttail`` marker provides these
   guarantees:

   #. The call will not cause unbounded stack growth if it is part of a
      recursive cycle in the call graph.
   #. Arguments with the :ref:`inalloca <attr_inalloca>` or
      :ref:`preallocated <attr_preallocated>` attribute are forwarded in place.
   #. If the musttail call appears in a function with the ``"thunk"`` attribute
      and the caller and callee both have varargs, then any unprototyped
      arguments in register or memory are forwarded to the callee. Similarly,
      the return value of the callee is returned to the caller's caller, even
      if a void return type is in use.

   Both markers imply that the callee does not access allocas from the caller.
   The ``tail`` marker additionally implies that the callee does not access
   varargs from the caller. Calls marked ``musttail`` must obey the following
   additional  rules:

   - The call must immediately precede a :ref:`ret <i_ret>` instruction,
     or a pointer bitcast followed by a ret instruction.
   - The ret instruction must return the (possibly bitcasted) value
     produced by the call, undef, or void.
   - The calling conventions of the caller and callee must match.
   - The callee must be varargs iff the caller is varargs. Bitcasting a
     non-varargs function to the appropriate varargs type is legal so
     long as the non-varargs prefixes obey the other rules.
   - The return type must not undergo automatic conversion to an `sret` pointer.

  In addition, if the calling convention is not `swifttailcc` or `tailcc`:

   - All ABI-impacting function attributes, such as sret, byval, inreg,
     returned, and inalloca, must match.
   - The caller and callee prototypes must match. Pointer types of parameters
     or return types may differ in pointee type, but not in address space.

  On the other hand, if the calling convention is `swifttailcc` or `swiftcc`:

   - Only these ABI-impacting attributes attributes are allowed: sret, byval,
     swiftself, and swiftasync.
   - Prototypes are not required to match.

   Tail call optimization for calls marked ``tail`` is guaranteed to occur if
   the following conditions are met:

   -  Caller and callee both have the calling convention ``fastcc`` or ``tailcc``.
   -  The call is in tail position (ret immediately follows call and ret
      uses value of call or is void).
   -  Option ``-tailcallopt`` is enabled,
      ``llvm::GuaranteedTailCallOpt`` is ``true``, or the calling convention
      is ``tailcc``
   -  `Platform-specific constraints are
      met. <CodeGenerator.html#tail-call-optimization>`_

#. The optional ``notail`` marker indicates that the optimizers should not add
   ``tail`` or ``musttail`` markers to the call. It is used to prevent tail
   call optimization from being performed on the call.

#. The optional ``fast-math flags`` marker indicates that the call has one or more
   :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`, which are optimization hints to enable
   otherwise unsafe floating-point optimizations. Fast-math flags are only valid
   for calls that return a floating-point scalar or vector type, or an array
   (nested to any depth) of floating-point scalar or vector types.

#. The optional "cconv" marker indicates which :ref:`calling
   convention <callingconv>` the call should use. If none is
   specified, the call defaults to using C calling conventions. The
   calling convention of the call must match the calling convention of
   the target function, or else the behavior is undefined.
#. The optional :ref:`Parameter Attributes <paramattrs>` list for return
   values. Only '``zeroext``', '``signext``', and '``inreg``' attributes
   are valid here.
#. The optional addrspace attribute can be used to indicate the address space
   of the called function. If it is not specified, the program address space
   from the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>` will be used.
#. '``ty``': the type of the call instruction itself which is also the
   type of the return value. Functions that return no value are marked
   ``void``.
#. '``fnty``': shall be the signature of the function being called. The
   argument types must match the types implied by this signature. This
   type can be omitted if the function is not varargs.
#. '``fnptrval``': An LLVM value containing a pointer to a function to
   be called. In most cases, this is a direct function call, but
   indirect ``call``'s are just as possible, calling an arbitrary pointer
   to function value.
#. '``function args``': argument list whose types match the function
   signature argument types and parameter attributes. All arguments must
   be of :ref:`first class <t_firstclass>` type. If the function signature
   indicates the function accepts a variable number of arguments, the
   extra arguments can be specified.
#. The optional :ref:`function attributes <fnattrs>` list.
#. The optional :ref:`operand bundles <opbundles>` list.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``call``' instruction is used to cause control flow to transfer to
a specified function, with its incoming arguments bound to the specified
values. Upon a '``ret``' instruction in the called function, control
flow continues with the instruction after the function call, and the
return value of the function is bound to the result argument.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %retval = call i32 @test(i32 %argc)
      call i32 (ptr, ...) @printf(ptr %msg, i32 12, i8 42)        ; yields i32
      %X = tail call i32 @foo()                                    ; yields i32
      %Y = tail call fastcc i32 @foo()  ; yields i32
      call void %foo(i8 signext 97)

      %struct.A = type { i32, i8 }
      %r = call %struct.A @foo()                        ; yields { i32, i8 }
      %gr = extractvalue %struct.A %r, 0                ; yields i32
      %gr1 = extractvalue %struct.A %r, 1               ; yields i8
      %Z = call void @foo() noreturn                    ; indicates that %foo never returns normally
      %ZZ = call zeroext i32 @bar()                     ; Return value is %zero extended

llvm treats calls to some functions with names and arguments that match
the standard C99 library as being the C99 library functions, and may
perform optimizations or generate code for them under that assumption.
This is something we'd like to change in the future to provide better
support for freestanding environments and non-C-based languages.

.. _i_va_arg:

'``va_arg``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <resultval> = va_arg <va_list*> <arglist>, <argty>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``va_arg``' instruction is used to access arguments passed through
the "variable argument" area of a function call. It is used to implement
the ``va_arg`` macro in C.

Arguments:
""""""""""

This instruction takes a ``va_list*`` value and the type of the
argument. It returns a value of the specified argument type and
increments the ``va_list`` to point to the next argument. The actual
type of ``va_list`` is target specific.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``va_arg``' instruction loads an argument of the specified type
from the specified ``va_list`` and causes the ``va_list`` to point to
the next argument. For more information, see the variable argument
handling :ref:`Intrinsic Functions <int_varargs>`.

It is legal for this instruction to be called in a function which does
not take a variable number of arguments, for example, the ``vfprintf``
function.

``va_arg`` is an LLVM instruction instead of an :ref:`intrinsic
function <intrinsics>` because it takes a type as an argument.

Example:
""""""""

See the :ref:`variable argument processing <int_varargs>` section.

Note that the code generator does not yet fully support va\_arg on many
targets. Also, it does not currently support va\_arg with aggregate
types on any target.

.. _i_landingpad:

'``landingpad``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <resultval> = landingpad <resultty> <clause>+
      <resultval> = landingpad <resultty> cleanup <clause>*

      <clause> := catch <type> <value>
      <clause> := filter <array constant type> <array constant>

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``landingpad``' instruction is used by `LLVM's exception handling
system <ExceptionHandling.html#overview>`_ to specify that a basic block
is a landing pad --- one where the exception lands, and corresponds to the
code found in the ``catch`` portion of a ``try``/``catch`` sequence. It
defines values supplied by the :ref:`personality function <personalityfn>` upon
re-entry to the function. The ``resultval`` has the type ``resultty``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The optional
``cleanup`` flag indicates that the landing pad block is a cleanup.

A ``clause`` begins with the clause type --- ``catch`` or ``filter`` --- and
contains the global variable representing the "type" that may be caught
or filtered respectively. Unlike the ``catch`` clause, the ``filter``
clause takes an array constant as its argument. Use
"``[0 x ptr] undef``" for a filter which cannot throw. The
'``landingpad``' instruction must contain *at least* one ``clause`` or
the ``cleanup`` flag.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``landingpad``' instruction defines the values which are set by the
:ref:`personality function <personalityfn>` upon re-entry to the function, and
therefore the "result type" of the ``landingpad`` instruction. As with
calling conventions, how the personality function results are
represented in LLVM IR is target specific.

The clauses are applied in order from top to bottom. If two
``landingpad`` instructions are merged together through inlining, the
clauses from the calling function are appended to the list of clauses.
When the call stack is being unwound due to an exception being thrown,
the exception is compared against each ``clause`` in turn. If it doesn't
match any of the clauses, and the ``cleanup`` flag is not set, then
unwinding continues further up the call stack.

The ``landingpad`` instruction has several restrictions:

-  A landing pad block is a basic block which is the unwind destination
   of an '``invoke``' instruction.
-  A landing pad block must have a '``landingpad``' instruction as its
   first non-PHI instruction.
-  There can be only one '``landingpad``' instruction within the landing
   pad block.
-  A basic block that is not a landing pad block may not include a
   '``landingpad``' instruction.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      ;; A landing pad which can catch an integer.
      %res = landingpad { ptr, i32 }
               catch ptr @_ZTIi
      ;; A landing pad that is a cleanup.
      %res = landingpad { ptr, i32 }
               cleanup
      ;; A landing pad which can catch an integer and can only throw a double.
      %res = landingpad { ptr, i32 }
               catch ptr @_ZTIi
               filter [1 x ptr] [ptr @_ZTId]

.. _i_catchpad:

'``catchpad``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <resultval> = catchpad within <catchswitch> [<args>*]

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``catchpad``' instruction is used by `LLVM's exception handling
system <ExceptionHandling.html#overview>`_ to specify that a basic block
begins a catch handler --- one where a personality routine attempts to transfer
control to catch an exception.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``catchswitch`` operand must always be a token produced by a
:ref:`catchswitch <i_catchswitch>` instruction in a predecessor block. This
ensures that each ``catchpad`` has exactly one predecessor block, and it always
terminates in a ``catchswitch``.

The ``args`` correspond to whatever information the personality routine
requires to know if this is an appropriate handler for the exception. Control
will transfer to the ``catchpad`` if this is the first appropriate handler for
the exception.

The ``resultval`` has the type :ref:`token <t_token>` and is used to match the
``catchpad`` to corresponding :ref:`catchrets <i_catchret>` and other nested EH
pads.

Semantics:
""""""""""

When the call stack is being unwound due to an exception being thrown, the
exception is compared against the ``args``. If it doesn't match, control will
not reach the ``catchpad`` instruction.  The representation of ``args`` is
entirely target and personality function-specific.

Like the :ref:`landingpad <i_landingpad>` instruction, the ``catchpad``
instruction must be the first non-phi of its parent basic block.

The meaning of the tokens produced and consumed by ``catchpad`` and other "pad"
instructions is described in the
`Windows exception handling documentation\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh>`_.

When a ``catchpad`` has been "entered" but not yet "exited" (as
described in the `EH documentation\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh-constraints>`_),
it is undefined behavior to execute a :ref:`call <i_call>` or :ref:`invoke <i_invoke>`
that does not carry an appropriate :ref:`"funclet" bundle <ob_funclet>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

    dispatch:
      %cs = catchswitch within none [label %handler0] unwind to caller
      ;; A catch block which can catch an integer.
    handler0:
      %tok = catchpad within %cs [ptr @_ZTIi]

.. _i_cleanuppad:

'``cleanuppad``' Instruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      <resultval> = cleanuppad within <parent> [<args>*]

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``cleanuppad``' instruction is used by `LLVM's exception handling
system <ExceptionHandling.html#overview>`_ to specify that a basic block
is a cleanup block --- one where a personality routine attempts to
transfer control to run cleanup actions.
The ``args`` correspond to whatever additional
information the :ref:`personality function <personalityfn>` requires to
execute the cleanup.
The ``resultval`` has the type :ref:`token <t_token>` and is used to
match the ``cleanuppad`` to corresponding :ref:`cleanuprets <i_cleanupret>`.
The ``parent`` argument is the token of the funclet that contains the
``cleanuppad`` instruction. If the ``cleanuppad`` is not inside a funclet,
this operand may be the token ``none``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The instruction takes a list of arbitrary values which are interpreted
by the :ref:`personality function <personalityfn>`.

Semantics:
""""""""""

When the call stack is being unwound due to an exception being thrown,
the :ref:`personality function <personalityfn>` transfers control to the
``cleanuppad`` with the aid of the personality-specific arguments.
As with calling conventions, how the personality function results are
represented in LLVM IR is target specific.

The ``cleanuppad`` instruction has several restrictions:

-  A cleanup block is a basic block which is the unwind destination of
   an exceptional instruction.
-  A cleanup block must have a '``cleanuppad``' instruction as its
   first non-PHI instruction.
-  There can be only one '``cleanuppad``' instruction within the
   cleanup block.
-  A basic block that is not a cleanup block may not include a
   '``cleanuppad``' instruction.

When a ``cleanuppad`` has been "entered" but not yet "exited" (as
described in the `EH documentation\ <ExceptionHandling.html#wineh-constraints>`_),
it is undefined behavior to execute a :ref:`call <i_call>` or :ref:`invoke <i_invoke>`
that does not carry an appropriate :ref:`"funclet" bundle <ob_funclet>`.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      %tok = cleanuppad within %cs []

.. _debugrecords:

Debug Records
-----------------------

Debug records appear interleaved with instructions, but are not instructions;
they are used only to define debug information, and have no effect on generated
code. They are distinguished from instructions by the use of a leading `#` and
an extra level of indentation. As an example:

.. code-block:: llvm

  %inst1 = op1 %a, %b
    #dbg_value(%inst1, !10, !DIExpression(), !11)
  %inst2 = op2 %inst1, %c

These debug records replace the prior :ref:`debug intrinsics<dbg_intrinsics>`.
Debug records will be disabled if ``--write-experimental-debuginfo=false`` is
passed to LLVM; it is an error for both records and intrinsics to appear in the
same module. More information about debug records can be found in the `LLVM
Source Level Debugging <SourceLevelDebugging.html#format-common-intrinsics>`_
document.

.. _intrinsics:

Intrinsic Functions
===================

LLVM supports the notion of an "intrinsic function". These functions
have well known names and semantics and are required to follow certain
restrictions. Overall, these intrinsics represent an extension mechanism
for the LLVM language that does not require changing all of the
transformations in LLVM when adding to the language (or the bitcode
reader/writer, the parser, etc...).

Intrinsic function names must all start with an "``llvm.``" prefix. This
prefix is reserved in LLVM for intrinsic names; thus, function names may
not begin with this prefix. Intrinsic functions must always be external
functions: you cannot define the body of intrinsic functions. Intrinsic
functions may only be used in call or invoke instructions: it is illegal
to take the address of an intrinsic function. Additionally, because
intrinsic functions are part of the LLVM language, it is required if any
are added that they be documented here.

Some intrinsic functions can be overloaded, i.e., the intrinsic
represents a family of functions that perform the same operation but on
different data types. Because LLVM can represent over 8 million
different integer types, overloading is used commonly to allow an
intrinsic function to operate on any integer type. One or more of the
argument types or the result type can be overloaded to accept any
integer type. Argument types may also be defined as exactly matching a
previous argument's type or the result type. This allows an intrinsic
function which accepts multiple arguments, but needs all of them to be
of the same type, to only be overloaded with respect to a single
argument or the result.

Overloaded intrinsics will have the names of its overloaded argument
types encoded into its function name, each preceded by a period. Only
those types which are overloaded result in a name suffix. Arguments
whose type is matched against another type do not. For example, the
``llvm.ctpop`` function can take an integer of any width and returns an
integer of exactly the same integer width. This leads to a family of
functions such as ``i8 @llvm.ctpop.i8(i8 %val)`` and
``i29 @llvm.ctpop.i29(i29 %val)``. Only one type, the return type, is
overloaded, and only one type suffix is required. Because the argument's
type is matched against the return type, it does not require its own
name suffix.

:ref:`Unnamed types <t_opaque>` are encoded as ``s_s``. Overloaded intrinsics
that depend on an unnamed type in one of its overloaded argument types get an
additional ``.<number>`` suffix. This allows differentiating intrinsics with
different unnamed types as arguments. (For example:
``llvm.ssa.copy.p0s_s.2(%42*)``) The number is tracked in the LLVM module and
it ensures unique names in the module. While linking together two modules, it is
still possible to get a name clash. In that case one of the names will be
changed by getting a new number.

For target developers who are defining intrinsics for back-end code
generation, any intrinsic overloads based solely the distinction between
integer or floating point types should not be relied upon for correct
code generation. In such cases, the recommended approach for target
maintainers when defining intrinsics is to create separate integer and
FP intrinsics rather than rely on overloading. For example, if different
codegen is required for ``llvm.target.foo(<4 x i32>)`` and
``llvm.target.foo(<4 x float>)`` then these should be split into
different intrinsics.

To learn how to add an intrinsic function, please see the `Extending
LLVM Guide <ExtendingLLVM.html>`_.

.. _int_varargs:

Variable Argument Handling Intrinsics
-------------------------------------

Variable argument support is defined in LLVM with the
:ref:`va_arg <i_va_arg>` instruction and these three intrinsic
functions. These functions are related to the similarly named macros
defined in the ``<stdarg.h>`` header file.

All of these functions take as arguments pointers to a target-specific
value type "``va_list``". The LLVM assembly language reference manual
does not define what this type is, so all transformations should be
prepared to handle these functions regardless of the type used. The intrinsics
are overloaded, and can be used for pointers to different address spaces.

This example shows how the :ref:`va_arg <i_va_arg>` instruction and the
variable argument handling intrinsic functions are used.

.. code-block:: llvm

    ; This struct is different for every platform. For most platforms,
    ; it is merely a ptr.
    %struct.va_list = type { ptr }

    ; For Unix x86_64 platforms, va_list is the following struct:
    ; %struct.va_list = type { i32, i32, ptr, ptr }

    define i32 @test(i32 %X, ...) {
      ; Initialize variable argument processing
      %ap = alloca %struct.va_list
      call void @llvm.va_start.p0(ptr %ap)

      ; Read a single integer argument
      %tmp = va_arg ptr %ap, i32

      ; Demonstrate usage of llvm.va_copy and llvm.va_end
      %aq = alloca ptr
      call void @llvm.va_copy.p0(ptr %aq, ptr %ap)
      call void @llvm.va_end.p0(ptr %aq)

      ; Stop processing of arguments.
      call void @llvm.va_end.p0(ptr %ap)
      ret i32 %tmp
    }

    declare void @llvm.va_start.p0(ptr)
    declare void @llvm.va_copy.p0(ptr, ptr)
    declare void @llvm.va_end.p0(ptr)

.. _int_va_start:

'``llvm.va_start``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.va_start.p0(ptr <arglist>)
      declare void @llvm.va_start.p5(ptr addrspace(5) <arglist>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.va_start``' intrinsic initializes ``<arglist>`` for
subsequent use by ``va_arg``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a pointer to a ``va_list`` element to initialize.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.va_start``' intrinsic works just like the ``va_start`` macro
available in C. In a target-dependent way, it initializes the
``va_list`` element to which the argument points, so that the next call
to ``va_arg`` will produce the first variable argument passed to the
function. Unlike the C ``va_start`` macro, this intrinsic does not need
to know the last argument of the function as the compiler can figure
that out.

'``llvm.va_end``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.va_end.p0(ptr <arglist>)
      declare void @llvm.va_end.p5(ptr addrspace(5) <arglist>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.va_end``' intrinsic destroys ``<arglist>``, which has been
initialized previously with ``llvm.va_start`` or ``llvm.va_copy``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a pointer to a ``va_list`` to destroy.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.va_end``' intrinsic works just like the ``va_end`` macro
available in C. In a target-dependent way, it destroys the ``va_list``
element to which the argument points. Calls to
:ref:`llvm.va_start <int_va_start>` and
:ref:`llvm.va_copy <int_va_copy>` must be matched exactly with calls to
``llvm.va_end``.

.. _int_va_copy:

'``llvm.va_copy``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.va_copy.p0(ptr <destarglist>, ptr <srcarglist>)
      declare void @llvm.va_copy.p5(ptr addrspace(5) <destarglist>, ptr addrspace(5) <srcarglist>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.va_copy``' intrinsic copies the current argument position
from the source argument list to the destination argument list.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to a ``va_list`` element to initialize.
The second argument is a pointer to a ``va_list`` element to copy from.
The address spaces of the two arguments must match.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.va_copy``' intrinsic works just like the ``va_copy`` macro
available in C. In a target-dependent way, it copies the source
``va_list`` element into the destination ``va_list`` element. This
intrinsic is necessary because the `` llvm.va_start`` intrinsic may be
arbitrarily complex and require, for example, memory allocation.

Accurate Garbage Collection Intrinsics
--------------------------------------

LLVM's support for `Accurate Garbage Collection <GarbageCollection.html>`_
(GC) requires the frontend to generate code containing appropriate intrinsic
calls and select an appropriate GC strategy which knows how to lower these
intrinsics in a manner which is appropriate for the target collector.

These intrinsics allow identification of :ref:`GC roots on the
stack <int_gcroot>`, as well as garbage collector implementations that
require :ref:`read <int_gcread>` and :ref:`write <int_gcwrite>` barriers.
Frontends for type-safe garbage collected languages should generate
these intrinsics to make use of the LLVM garbage collectors. For more
details, see `Garbage Collection with LLVM <GarbageCollection.html>`_.

LLVM provides an second experimental set of intrinsics for describing garbage
collection safepoints in compiled code. These intrinsics are an alternative
to the ``llvm.gcroot`` intrinsics, but are compatible with the ones for
:ref:`read <int_gcread>` and :ref:`write <int_gcwrite>` barriers. The
differences in approach are covered in the `Garbage Collection with LLVM
<GarbageCollection.html>`_ documentation. The intrinsics themselves are
described in :doc:`Statepoints`.

.. _int_gcroot:

'``llvm.gcroot``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.gcroot(ptr %ptrloc, ptr %metadata)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.gcroot``' intrinsic declares the existence of a GC root to
the code generator, and allows some metadata to be associated with it.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument specifies the address of a stack object that contains
the root pointer. The second pointer (which must be either a constant or
a global value address) contains the meta-data to be associated with the
root.

Semantics:
""""""""""

At runtime, a call to this intrinsic stores a null pointer into the
"ptrloc" location. At compile-time, the code generator generates
information to allow the runtime to find the pointer at GC safe points.
The '``llvm.gcroot``' intrinsic may only be used in a function which
:ref:`specifies a GC algorithm <gc>`.

.. _int_gcread:

'``llvm.gcread``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.gcread(ptr %ObjPtr, ptr %Ptr)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.gcread``' intrinsic identifies reads of references from heap
locations, allowing garbage collector implementations that require read
barriers.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The second argument is the address to read from, which should be an
address allocated from the garbage collector. The first object is a
pointer to the start of the referenced object, if needed by the language
runtime (otherwise null).

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.gcread``' intrinsic has the same semantics as a load
instruction, but may be replaced with substantially more complex code by
the garbage collector runtime, as needed. The '``llvm.gcread``'
intrinsic may only be used in a function which :ref:`specifies a GC
algorithm <gc>`.

.. _int_gcwrite:

'``llvm.gcwrite``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.gcwrite(ptr %P1, ptr %Obj, ptr %P2)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.gcwrite``' intrinsic identifies writes of references to heap
locations, allowing garbage collector implementations that require write
barriers (such as generational or reference counting collectors).

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the reference to store, the second is the start of
the object to store it to, and the third is the address of the field of
Obj to store to. If the runtime does not require a pointer to the
object, Obj may be null.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.gcwrite``' intrinsic has the same semantics as a store
instruction, but may be replaced with substantially more complex code by
the garbage collector runtime, as needed. The '``llvm.gcwrite``'
intrinsic may only be used in a function which :ref:`specifies a GC
algorithm <gc>`.


.. _gc_statepoint:

'``llvm.experimental.gc.statepoint``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare token
        @llvm.experimental.gc.statepoint(i64 <id>, i32 <num patch bytes>,
                       ptr elementtype(func_type) <target>,
                       i64 <#call args>, i64 <flags>,
                       ... (call parameters),
                       i64 0, i64 0)

Overview:
"""""""""

The statepoint intrinsic represents a call which is parse-able by the
runtime.

Operands:
"""""""""

The 'id' operand is a constant integer that is reported as the ID
field in the generated stackmap.  LLVM does not interpret this
parameter in any way and its meaning is up to the statepoint user to
decide.  Note that LLVM is free to duplicate code containing
statepoint calls, and this may transform IR that had a unique 'id' per
lexical call to statepoint to IR that does not.

If 'num patch bytes' is non-zero then the call instruction
corresponding to the statepoint is not emitted and LLVM emits 'num
patch bytes' bytes of nops in its place.  LLVM will emit code to
prepare the function arguments and retrieve the function return value
in accordance to the calling convention; the former before the nop
sequence and the latter after the nop sequence.  It is expected that
the user will patch over the 'num patch bytes' bytes of nops with a
calling sequence specific to their runtime before executing the
generated machine code.  There are no guarantees with respect to the
alignment of the nop sequence.  Unlike :doc:`StackMaps` statepoints do
not have a concept of shadow bytes.  Note that semantically the
statepoint still represents a call or invoke to 'target', and the nop
sequence after patching is expected to represent an operation
equivalent to a call or invoke to 'target'.

The 'target' operand is the function actually being called. The operand
must have an :ref:`elementtype <attr_elementtype>` attribute specifying
the function type of the target. The target can be specified as either
a symbolic LLVM function, or as an arbitrary Value of pointer type. Note
that the function type must match the signature of the callee and the
types of the 'call parameters' arguments.

The '#call args' operand is the number of arguments to the actual
call.  It must exactly match the number of arguments passed in the
'call parameters' variable length section.

The 'flags' operand is used to specify extra information about the
statepoint. This is currently only used to mark certain statepoints
as GC transitions. This operand is a 64-bit integer with the following
layout, where bit 0 is the least significant bit:

  +-------+---------------------------------------------------+
  | Bit # | Usage                                             |
  +=======+===================================================+
  |     0 | Set if the statepoint is a GC transition, cleared |
  |       | otherwise.                                        |
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------+
  |  1-63 | Reserved for future use; must be cleared.         |
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------+

The 'call parameters' arguments are simply the arguments which need to
be passed to the call target.  They will be lowered according to the
specified calling convention and otherwise handled like a normal call
instruction.  The number of arguments must exactly match what is
specified in '# call args'.  The types must match the signature of
'target'.

The 'call parameter' attributes must be followed by two 'i64 0' constants.
These were originally the length prefixes for 'gc transition parameter' and
'deopt parameter' arguments, but the role of these parameter sets have been
entirely replaced with the corresponding operand bundles.  In a future
revision, these now redundant arguments will be removed.

Semantics:
""""""""""

A statepoint is assumed to read and write all memory.  As a result,
memory operations can not be reordered past a statepoint.  It is
illegal to mark a statepoint as being either 'readonly' or 'readnone'.

Note that legal IR can not perform any memory operation on a 'gc
pointer' argument of the statepoint in a location statically reachable
from the statepoint.  Instead, the explicitly relocated value (from a
``gc.relocate``) must be used.

'``llvm.experimental.gc.result``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare type
        @llvm.experimental.gc.result(token %statepoint_token)

Overview:
"""""""""

``gc.result`` extracts the result of the original call instruction
which was replaced by the ``gc.statepoint``.  The ``gc.result``
intrinsic is actually a family of three intrinsics due to an
implementation limitation.  Other than the type of the return value,
the semantics are the same.

Operands:
"""""""""

The first and only argument is the ``gc.statepoint`` which starts
the safepoint sequence of which this ``gc.result`` is a part.
Despite the typing of this as a generic token, *only* the value defined
by a ``gc.statepoint`` is legal here.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``gc.result`` represents the return value of the call target of
the ``statepoint``.  The type of the ``gc.result`` must exactly match
the type of the target.  If the call target returns void, there will
be no ``gc.result``.

A ``gc.result`` is modeled as a 'readnone' pure function.  It has no
side effects since it is just a projection of the return value of the
previous call represented by the ``gc.statepoint``.

'``llvm.experimental.gc.relocate``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <pointer type>
        @llvm.experimental.gc.relocate(token %statepoint_token,
                                       i32 %base_offset,
                                       i32 %pointer_offset)

Overview:
"""""""""

A ``gc.relocate`` returns the potentially relocated value of a pointer
at the safepoint.

Operands:
"""""""""

The first argument is the ``gc.statepoint`` which starts the
safepoint sequence of which this ``gc.relocation`` is a part.
Despite the typing of this as a generic token, *only* the value defined
by a ``gc.statepoint`` is legal here.

The second and third arguments are both indices into operands of the
corresponding statepoint's :ref:`gc-live <ob_gc_live>` operand bundle.

The second argument is an index which specifies the allocation for the pointer
being relocated. The associated value must be within the object with which the
pointer being relocated is associated. The optimizer is free to change *which*
interior derived pointer is reported, provided that it does not replace an
actual base pointer with another interior derived pointer. Collectors are
allowed to rely on the base pointer operand remaining an actual base pointer if
so constructed.

The third argument is an index which specify the (potentially) derived pointer
being relocated.  It is legal for this index to be the same as the second
argument if-and-only-if a base pointer is being relocated.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The return value of ``gc.relocate`` is the potentially relocated value
of the pointer specified by its arguments.  It is unspecified how the
value of the returned pointer relates to the argument to the
``gc.statepoint`` other than that a) it points to the same source
language object with the same offset, and b) the 'based-on'
relationship of the newly relocated pointers is a projection of the
unrelocated pointers.  In particular, the integer value of the pointer
returned is unspecified.

A ``gc.relocate`` is modeled as a ``readnone`` pure function.  It has no
side effects since it is just a way to extract information about work
done during the actual call modeled by the ``gc.statepoint``.

.. _gc.get.pointer.base:

'``llvm.experimental.gc.get.pointer.base``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <pointer type>
        @llvm.experimental.gc.get.pointer.base(
          <pointer type> readnone nocapture %derived_ptr)
          nounwind willreturn memory(none)

Overview:
"""""""""

``gc.get.pointer.base`` for a derived pointer returns its base pointer.

Operands:
"""""""""

The only argument is a pointer which is based on some object with
an unknown offset from the base of said object.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic is used in the abstract machine model for GC to represent
the base pointer for an arbitrary derived pointer.

This intrinsic is inlined by the :ref:`RewriteStatepointsForGC` pass by
replacing all uses of this callsite with the offset of a derived pointer from
its base pointer value. The replacement is done as part of the lowering to the
explicit statepoint model.

The return pointer type must be the same as the type of the parameter.


'``llvm.experimental.gc.get.pointer.offset``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i64
        @llvm.experimental.gc.get.pointer.offset(
          <pointer type> readnone nocapture %derived_ptr)
          nounwind willreturn memory(none)

Overview:
"""""""""

``gc.get.pointer.offset`` for a derived pointer returns the offset from its
base pointer.

Operands:
"""""""""

The only argument is a pointer which is based on some object with
an unknown offset from the base of said object.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic is used in the abstract machine model for GC to represent
the offset of an arbitrary derived pointer from its base pointer.

This intrinsic is inlined by the :ref:`RewriteStatepointsForGC` pass by
replacing all uses of this callsite with the offset of a derived pointer from
its base pointer value. The replacement is done as part of the lowering to the
explicit statepoint model.

Basically this call calculates difference between the derived pointer and its
base pointer (see :ref:`gc.get.pointer.base`) both ptrtoint casted. But
this cast done outside the :ref:`RewriteStatepointsForGC` pass could result
in the pointers lost for further lowering from the abstract model to the
explicit physical one.

Code Generator Intrinsics
-------------------------

These intrinsics are provided by LLVM to expose special features that
may only be implemented with code generator support.

'``llvm.returnaddress``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.returnaddress(i32 <level>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.returnaddress``' intrinsic attempts to compute a
target-specific value indicating the return address of the current
function or one of its callers.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument to this intrinsic indicates which function to return the
address for. Zero indicates the calling function, one indicates its
caller, etc. The argument is **required** to be a constant integer
value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.returnaddress``' intrinsic either returns a pointer
indicating the return address of the specified call frame, or zero if it
cannot be identified. The value returned by this intrinsic is likely to
be incorrect or 0 for arguments other than zero, so it should only be
used for debugging purposes.

Note that calling this intrinsic does not prevent function inlining or
other aggressive transformations, so the value returned may not be that
of the obvious source-language caller.

'``llvm.addressofreturnaddress``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.addressofreturnaddress()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.addressofreturnaddress``' intrinsic returns a target-specific
pointer to the place in the stack frame where the return address of the
current function is stored.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Note that calling this intrinsic does not prevent function inlining or
other aggressive transformations, so the value returned may not be that
of the obvious source-language caller.

This intrinsic is only implemented for x86 and aarch64.

'``llvm.sponentry``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.sponentry()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sponentry``' intrinsic returns the stack pointer value at
the entry of the current function calling this intrinsic.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Note this intrinsic is only verified on AArch64 and ARM.

'``llvm.frameaddress``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.frameaddress(i32 <level>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.frameaddress``' intrinsic attempts to return the
target-specific frame pointer value for the specified stack frame.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument to this intrinsic indicates which function to return the
frame pointer for. Zero indicates the calling function, one indicates
its caller, etc. The argument is **required** to be a constant integer
value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.frameaddress``' intrinsic either returns a pointer
indicating the frame address of the specified call frame, or zero if it
cannot be identified. The value returned by this intrinsic is likely to
be incorrect or 0 for arguments other than zero, so it should only be
used for debugging purposes.

Note that calling this intrinsic does not prevent function inlining or
other aggressive transformations, so the value returned may not be that
of the obvious source-language caller.

'``llvm.swift.async.context.addr``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.swift.async.context.addr()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.swift.async.context.addr``' intrinsic returns a pointer to
the part of the extended frame record containing the asynchronous
context of a Swift execution.

Semantics:
""""""""""

If the caller has a ``swiftasync`` parameter, that argument will initially
be stored at the returned address. If not, it will be initialized to null.

'``llvm.localescape``' and '``llvm.localrecover``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.localescape(...)
      declare ptr @llvm.localrecover(ptr %func, ptr %fp, i32 %idx)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.localescape``' intrinsic escapes offsets of a collection of static
allocas, and the '``llvm.localrecover``' intrinsic applies those offsets to a
live frame pointer to recover the address of the allocation. The offset is
computed during frame layout of the caller of ``llvm.localescape``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

All arguments to '``llvm.localescape``' must be pointers to static allocas or
casts of static allocas. Each function can only call '``llvm.localescape``'
once, and it can only do so from the entry block.

The ``func`` argument to '``llvm.localrecover``' must be a constant
bitcasted pointer to a function defined in the current module. The code
generator cannot determine the frame allocation offset of functions defined in
other modules.

The ``fp`` argument to '``llvm.localrecover``' must be a frame pointer of a
call frame that is currently live. The return value of '``llvm.localaddress``'
is one way to produce such a value, but various runtimes also expose a suitable
pointer in platform-specific ways.

The ``idx`` argument to '``llvm.localrecover``' indicates which alloca passed to
'``llvm.localescape``' to recover. It is zero-indexed.

Semantics:
""""""""""

These intrinsics allow a group of functions to share access to a set of local
stack allocations of a one parent function. The parent function may call the
'``llvm.localescape``' intrinsic once from the function entry block, and the
child functions can use '``llvm.localrecover``' to access the escaped allocas.
The '``llvm.localescape``' intrinsic blocks inlining, as inlining changes where
the escaped allocas are allocated, which would break attempts to use
'``llvm.localrecover``'.

'``llvm.seh.try.begin``' and '``llvm.seh.try.end``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.seh.try.begin()
      declare void @llvm.seh.try.end()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.seh.try.begin``' and '``llvm.seh.try.end``' intrinsics mark
the boundary of a _try region for Windows SEH Asynchronous Exception Handling.

Semantics:
""""""""""

When a C-function is compiled with Windows SEH Asynchronous Exception option,
-feh_asynch (aka MSVC -EHa), these two intrinsics are injected to mark _try
boundary and to prevent potential exceptions from being moved across boundary.
Any set of operations can then be confined to the region by reading their leaf
inputs via volatile loads and writing their root outputs via volatile stores.

'``llvm.seh.scope.begin``' and '``llvm.seh.scope.end``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.seh.scope.begin()
      declare void @llvm.seh.scope.end()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.seh.scope.begin``' and '``llvm.seh.scope.end``' intrinsics mark
the boundary of a CPP object lifetime for Windows SEH Asynchronous Exception
Handling (MSVC option -EHa).

Semantics:
""""""""""

LLVM's ordinary exception-handling representation associates EH cleanups and
handlers only with ``invoke``s, which normally correspond only to call sites.  To
support arbitrary faulting instructions, it must be possible to recover the current
EH scope for any instruction.  Turning every operation in LLVM that could fault
into an ``invoke`` of a new, potentially-throwing intrinsic would require adding a
large number of intrinsics, impede optimization of those operations, and make
compilation slower by introducing many extra basic blocks.  These intrinsics can
be used instead to mark the region protected by a cleanup, such as for a local
C++ object with a non-trivial destructor.  ``llvm.seh.scope.begin`` is used to mark
the start of the region; it is always called with ``invoke``, with the unwind block
being the desired unwind destination for any potentially-throwing instructions
within the region.  `llvm.seh.scope.end` is used to mark when the scope ends
and the EH cleanup is no longer required (e.g. because the destructor is being
called).

.. _int_read_register:
.. _int_read_volatile_register:
.. _int_write_register:

'``llvm.read_register``', '``llvm.read_volatile_register``', and '``llvm.write_register``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.read_register.i32(metadata)
      declare i64 @llvm.read_register.i64(metadata)
      declare i32 @llvm.read_volatile_register.i32(metadata)
      declare i64 @llvm.read_volatile_register.i64(metadata)
      declare void @llvm.write_register.i32(metadata, i32 @value)
      declare void @llvm.write_register.i64(metadata, i64 @value)
      !0 = !{!"sp\00"}

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.read_register``', '``llvm.read_volatile_register``', and
'``llvm.write_register``' intrinsics provide access to the named register.
The register must be valid on the architecture being compiled to. The type
needs to be compatible with the register being read.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.read_register``' and '``llvm.read_volatile_register``' intrinsics
return the current value of the register, where possible. The
'``llvm.write_register``' intrinsic sets the current value of the register,
where possible.

A call to '``llvm.read_volatile_register``' is assumed to have side-effects
and possibly return a different value each time (e.g. for a timer register).

This is useful to implement named register global variables that need
to always be mapped to a specific register, as is common practice on
bare-metal programs including OS kernels.

The compiler doesn't check for register availability or use of the used
register in surrounding code, including inline assembly. Because of that,
allocatable registers are not supported.

Warning: So far it only works with the stack pointer on selected
architectures (ARM, AArch64, PowerPC and x86_64). Significant amount of
work is needed to support other registers and even more so, allocatable
registers.

.. _int_stacksave:

'``llvm.stacksave``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.stacksave.p0()
      declare ptr addrspace(5) @llvm.stacksave.p5()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.stacksave``' intrinsic is used to remember the current state
of the function stack, for use with
:ref:`llvm.stackrestore <int_stackrestore>`. This is useful for
implementing language features like scoped automatic variable sized
arrays in C99.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic returns an opaque pointer value that can be passed to
:ref:`llvm.stackrestore <int_stackrestore>`. When an
``llvm.stackrestore`` intrinsic is executed with a value saved from
``llvm.stacksave``, it effectively restores the state of the stack to
the state it was in when the ``llvm.stacksave`` intrinsic executed. In
practice, this pops any :ref:`alloca <i_alloca>` blocks from the stack
that were allocated after the ``llvm.stacksave`` was executed. The
address space should typically be the
:ref:`alloca address space <alloca_addrspace>`.

.. _int_stackrestore:

'``llvm.stackrestore``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.stackrestore.p0(ptr %ptr)
      declare void @llvm.stackrestore.p5(ptr addrspace(5) %ptr)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.stackrestore``' intrinsic is used to restore the state of
the function stack to the state it was in when the corresponding
:ref:`llvm.stacksave <int_stacksave>` intrinsic executed. This is
useful for implementing language features like scoped automatic
variable sized arrays in C99. The address space should typically be
the :ref:`alloca address space <alloca_addrspace>`.

Semantics:
""""""""""

See the description for :ref:`llvm.stacksave <int_stacksave>`.

.. _int_get_dynamic_area_offset:

'``llvm.get.dynamic.area.offset``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.get.dynamic.area.offset.i32()
      declare i64 @llvm.get.dynamic.area.offset.i64()

Overview:
"""""""""

      The '``llvm.get.dynamic.area.offset.*``' intrinsic family is used to
      get the offset from native stack pointer to the address of the most
      recent dynamic alloca on the caller's stack. These intrinsics are
      intended for use in combination with
      :ref:`llvm.stacksave <int_stacksave>` to get a
      pointer to the most recent dynamic alloca. This is useful, for example,
      for AddressSanitizer's stack unpoisoning routines.

Semantics:
""""""""""

      These intrinsics return a non-negative integer value that can be used to
      get the address of the most recent dynamic alloca, allocated by :ref:`alloca <i_alloca>`
      on the caller's stack. In particular, for targets where stack grows downwards,
      adding this offset to the native stack pointer would get the address of the most
      recent dynamic alloca. For targets where stack grows upwards, the situation is a bit more
      complicated, because subtracting this value from stack pointer would get the address
      one past the end of the most recent dynamic alloca.

      Although for most targets `llvm.get.dynamic.area.offset <int_get_dynamic_area_offset>`
      returns just a zero, for others, such as PowerPC and PowerPC64, it returns a
      compile-time-known constant value.

      The return value type of :ref:`llvm.get.dynamic.area.offset <int_get_dynamic_area_offset>`
      must match the target's default address space's (address space 0) pointer type.

'``llvm.prefetch``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.prefetch(ptr <address>, i32 <rw>, i32 <locality>, i32 <cache type>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.prefetch``' intrinsic is a hint to the code generator to
insert a prefetch instruction if supported; otherwise, it is a noop.
Prefetches have no effect on the behavior of the program but can change
its performance characteristics.

Arguments:
""""""""""

``address`` is the address to be prefetched, ``rw`` is the specifier
determining if the fetch should be for a read (0) or write (1), and
``locality`` is a temporal locality specifier ranging from (0) - no
locality, to (3) - extremely local keep in cache. The ``cache type``
specifies whether the prefetch is performed on the data (1) or
instruction (0) cache. The ``rw``, ``locality`` and ``cache type``
arguments must be constant integers.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic does not modify the behavior of the program. In
particular, prefetches cannot trap and do not produce a value. On
targets that support this intrinsic, the prefetch can provide hints to
the processor cache for better performance.

'``llvm.pcmarker``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.pcmarker(i32 <id>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.pcmarker``' intrinsic is a method to export a Program
Counter (PC) in a region of code to simulators and other tools. The
method is target specific, but it is expected that the marker will use
exported symbols to transmit the PC of the marker. The marker makes no
guarantees that it will remain with any specific instruction after
optimizations. It is possible that the presence of a marker will inhibit
optimizations. The intended use is to be inserted after optimizations to
allow correlations of simulation runs.

Arguments:
""""""""""

``id`` is a numerical id identifying the marker.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic does not modify the behavior of the program. Backends
that do not support this intrinsic may ignore it.

'``llvm.readcyclecounter``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i64 @llvm.readcyclecounter()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.readcyclecounter``' intrinsic provides access to the cycle
counter register (or similar low latency, high accuracy clocks) on those
targets that support it. On X86, it should map to RDTSC. On Alpha, it
should map to RPCC. As the backing counters overflow quickly (on the
order of 9 seconds on alpha), this should only be used for small
timings.

Semantics:
""""""""""

When directly supported, reading the cycle counter should not modify any
memory. Implementations are allowed to either return an application
specific value or a system wide value. On backends without support, this
is lowered to a constant 0.

Note that runtime support may be conditional on the privilege-level code is
running at and the host platform.

'``llvm.clear_cache``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.clear_cache(ptr, ptr)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.clear_cache``' intrinsic ensures visibility of modifications
in the specified range to the execution unit of the processor. On
targets with non-unified instruction and data cache, the implementation
flushes the instruction cache.

Semantics:
""""""""""

On platforms with coherent instruction and data caches (e.g. x86), this
intrinsic is a nop. On platforms with non-coherent instruction and data
cache (e.g. ARM, MIPS), the intrinsic is lowered either to appropriate
instructions or a system call, if cache flushing requires special
privileges.

The default behavior is to emit a call to ``__clear_cache`` from the run
time library.

This intrinsic does *not* empty the instruction pipeline. Modifications
of the current function are outside the scope of the intrinsic.

'``llvm.instrprof.increment``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.increment(ptr <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                             i32 <num-counters>, i32 <index>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.increment``' intrinsic can be emitted by a
frontend for use with instrumentation based profiling. These will be
lowered by the ``-instrprof`` pass to generate execution counts of a
program at runtime.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to a global variable containing the
name of the entity being instrumented. This should generally be the
(mangled) function name for a set of counters.

The second argument is a hash value that can be used by the consumer
of the profile data to detect changes to the instrumented source, and
the third is the number of counters associated with ``name``. It is an
error if ``hash`` or ``num-counters`` differ between two instances of
``instrprof.increment`` that refer to the same name.

The last argument refers to which of the counters for ``name`` should
be incremented. It should be a value between 0 and ``num-counters``.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic represents an increment of a profiling counter. It will
cause the ``-instrprof`` pass to generate the appropriate data
structures and the code to increment the appropriate value, in a
format that can be written out by a compiler runtime and consumed via
the ``llvm-profdata`` tool.

.. FIXME: write complete doc on contextual instrumentation and link from here
.. and from llvm.instrprof.callsite.

The intrinsic is lowered differently for contextual profiling by the
``-ctx-instr-lower`` pass. Here:

* the entry basic block increment counter is lowered as a call to compiler-rt,
  to either ``__llvm_ctx_profile_start_context`` or
  ``__llvm_ctx_profile_get_context``. Either returns a pointer to a context object
  which contains a buffer into which counter increments can happen. Note that the
  pointer value returned by compiler-rt may have its LSB set - counter increments
  happen offset from the address with the LSB cleared.

* all the other lowerings of ``llvm.instrprof.increment[.step]`` happen within
  that context.

* the context is assumed to be a local value to the function, and no concurrency
  concerns need to be handled by LLVM.

'``llvm.instrprof.increment.step``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.increment.step(ptr <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                                  i32 <num-counters>,
                                                  i32 <index>, i64 <step>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.increment.step``' intrinsic is an extension to
the '``llvm.instrprof.increment``' intrinsic with an additional fifth
argument to specify the step of the increment.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The first four arguments are the same as '``llvm.instrprof.increment``'
intrinsic.

The last argument specifies the value of the increment of the counter variable.

Semantics:
""""""""""
See description of '``llvm.instrprof.increment``' intrinsic.

'``llvm.instrprof.callsite``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.callsite(ptr <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                            i32 <num-counters>,
                                            i32 <index>, ptr <callsite>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.callsite``' intrinsic should be emitted before a callsite
that's not to a "fake" callee (like another intrinsic or asm). It is used by
contextual profiling and has side-effects. Its lowering happens in IR, and
target-specific backends should never encounter it.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The first 4 arguments are similar to ``llvm.instrprof.increment``. The indexing
is specific to callsites, meaning callsites are indexed from 0, independent from
the indexes used by the other intrinsics (such as 
``llvm.instrprof.increment[.step]``).

The last argument is the called value of the callsite this intrinsic precedes.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This is lowered by contextual profiling. In contextual profiling, functions get,
from compiler-rt, a pointer to a context object. The context object consists of
a buffer LLVM can use to perform counter increments (i.e. the lowering of
``llvm.instrprof.increment[.step]``. The address range following the counter
buffer, ``<num-counters>`` x ``sizeof(ptr)`` - sized, is expected to contain
pointers to contexts of functions called from this function ("subcontexts").
LLVM does not dereference into that memory region, just calculates GEPs. 

The lowering of ``llvm.instrprof.callsite`` consists of:

* write to ``__llvm_ctx_profile_expected_callee`` the ``<callsite>`` value;

* write to ``__llvm_ctx_profile_callsite`` the address into this function's
  context of the ``<index>`` position into the subcontexts region.


``__llvm_ctx_profile_{expected_callee|callsite}`` are initialized by compiler-rt
and are TLS. They are both vectors of pointers of size 2. The index into each is
determined when the current function obtains the pointer to its context from
compiler-rt. The pointer's LSB gives the index.


'``llvm.instrprof.timestamp``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.timestamp(i8* <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                             i32 <num-counters>, i32 <index>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.timestamp``' intrinsic is used to implement temporal
profiling.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The arguments are the same as '``llvm.instrprof.increment``'. The ``index`` is
expected to always be zero.

Semantics:
""""""""""
Similar to the '``llvm.instrprof.increment``' intrinsic, but it stores a
timestamp representing when this function was executed for the first time.

'``llvm.instrprof.cover``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.cover(ptr <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                         i32 <num-counters>, i32 <index>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.cover``' intrinsic is used to implement coverage
instrumentation.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The arguments are the same as the first four arguments of
'``llvm.instrprof.increment``'.

Semantics:
""""""""""
Similar to the '``llvm.instrprof.increment``' intrinsic, but it stores zero to
the profiling variable to signify that the function has been covered. We store
zero because this is more efficient on some targets.

'``llvm.instrprof.value.profile``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.value.profile(ptr <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                                 i64 <value>, i32 <value_kind>,
                                                 i32 <index>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.value.profile``' intrinsic can be emitted by a
frontend for use with instrumentation based profiling. This will be
lowered by the ``-instrprof`` pass to find out the target values,
instrumented expressions take in a program at runtime.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to a global variable containing the
name of the entity being instrumented. ``name`` should generally be the
(mangled) function name for a set of counters.

The second argument is a hash value that can be used by the consumer
of the profile data to detect changes to the instrumented source. It
is an error if ``hash`` differs between two instances of
``llvm.instrprof.*`` that refer to the same name.

The third argument is the value of the expression being profiled. The profiled
expression's value should be representable as an unsigned 64-bit value. The
fourth argument represents the kind of value profiling that is being done. The
supported value profiling kinds are enumerated through the
``InstrProfValueKind`` type declared in the
``<include/llvm/ProfileData/InstrProf.h>`` header file. The last argument is the
index of the instrumented expression within ``name``. It should be >= 0.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic represents the point where a call to a runtime routine
should be inserted for value profiling of target expressions. ``-instrprof``
pass will generate the appropriate data structures and replace the
``llvm.instrprof.value.profile`` intrinsic with the call to the profile
runtime library with proper arguments.

'``llvm.instrprof.mcdc.parameters``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.mcdc.parameters(ptr <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                                   i32 <bitmap-bits>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.mcdc.parameters``' intrinsic is used to initiate MC/DC
code coverage instrumentation for a function.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to a global variable containing the
name of the entity being instrumented. This should generally be the
(mangled) function name for a set of counters.

The second argument is a hash value that can be used by the consumer
of the profile data to detect changes to the instrumented source.

The third argument is the number of bitmap bits required by the function to
record the number of test vectors executed for each boolean expression.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic represents basic MC/DC parameters initiating one or more MC/DC
instrumentation sequences in a function. It will cause the ``-instrprof`` pass
to generate the appropriate data structures and the code to instrument MC/DC
test vectors in a format that can be written out by a compiler runtime and
consumed via the ``llvm-profdata`` tool.

'``llvm.instrprof.mcdc.tvbitmap.update``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.instrprof.mcdc.tvbitmap.update(ptr <name>, i64 <hash>,
                                                        i32 <bitmap-index>,
                                                        ptr <mcdc-temp-addr>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.instrprof.mcdc.tvbitmap.update``' intrinsic is used to track MC/DC
test vector execution after each boolean expression has been fully executed.
The overall value of the condition bitmap, after it has been successively
updated with the true or false evaluation of each condition, uniquely identifies
an executed MC/DC test vector and is used as a bit index into the global test
vector bitmap.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to a global variable containing the
name of the entity being instrumented. This should generally be the
(mangled) function name for a set of counters.

The second argument is a hash value that can be used by the consumer
of the profile data to detect changes to the instrumented source.

The third argument is the bit index into the global test vector bitmap
corresponding to the function.

The fourth argument is the address of the condition bitmap, which contains a
value representing an executed MC/DC test vector. It is loaded and used as the
bit index of the test vector bitmap.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic represents the final operation of an MC/DC instrumentation
sequence and will cause the ``-instrprof`` pass to generate the code to
instrument an update of a function's global test vector bitmap to indicate that
a test vector has been executed. The global test vector bitmap can be consumed
by the ``llvm-profdata`` and ``llvm-cov`` tools.

'``llvm.thread.pointer``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.thread.pointer()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.thread.pointer``' intrinsic returns the value of the thread
pointer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.thread.pointer``' intrinsic returns a pointer to the TLS area
for the current thread.  The exact semantics of this value are target
specific: it may point to the start of TLS area, to the end, or somewhere
in the middle.  Depending on the target, this intrinsic may read a register,
call a helper function, read from an alternate memory space, or perform
other operations necessary to locate the TLS area.  Not all targets support
this intrinsic.

'``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare token @llvm.call.preallocated.setup(i32 %num_args)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``' intrinsic returns a token which can
be used with a call's ``"preallocated"`` operand bundle to indicate that
certain arguments are allocated and initialized before the call.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``' intrinsic returns a token which is
associated with at most one call. The token can be passed to
'``@llvm.call.preallocated.arg``' to get a pointer to get that
corresponding argument. The token must be the parameter to a
``"preallocated"`` operand bundle for the corresponding call.

Nested calls to '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``' are allowed, but must
be properly nested. e.g.

:: code-block:: llvm

      %t1 = call token @llvm.call.preallocated.setup(i32 0)
      %t2 = call token @llvm.call.preallocated.setup(i32 0)
      call void foo() ["preallocated"(token %t2)]
      call void foo() ["preallocated"(token %t1)]

is allowed, but not

:: code-block:: llvm

      %t1 = call token @llvm.call.preallocated.setup(i32 0)
      %t2 = call token @llvm.call.preallocated.setup(i32 0)
      call void foo() ["preallocated"(token %t1)]
      call void foo() ["preallocated"(token %t2)]

.. _int_call_preallocated_arg:

'``llvm.call.preallocated.arg``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.call.preallocated.arg(token %setup_token, i32 %arg_index)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.call.preallocated.arg``' intrinsic returns a pointer to the
corresponding preallocated argument for the preallocated call.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.call.preallocated.arg``' intrinsic returns a pointer to the
``%arg_index``th argument with the ``preallocated`` attribute for
the call associated with the ``%setup_token``, which must be from
'``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``'.

A call to '``llvm.call.preallocated.arg``' must have a call site
``preallocated`` attribute. The type of the ``preallocated`` attribute must
match the type used by the ``preallocated`` attribute of the corresponding
argument at the preallocated call. The type is used in the case that an
``llvm.call.preallocated.setup`` does not have a corresponding call (e.g. due
to DCE), where otherwise we cannot know how large the arguments are.

It is undefined behavior if this is called with a token from an
'``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``' if another
'``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``' has already been called or if the
preallocated call corresponding to the '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``'
has already been called.

.. _int_call_preallocated_teardown:

'``llvm.call.preallocated.teardown``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.call.preallocated.teardown(token %setup_token)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.call.preallocated.teardown``' intrinsic cleans up the stack
created by a '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``'.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The token argument must be a '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``'.

The '``llvm.call.preallocated.teardown``' intrinsic cleans up the stack
allocated by the corresponding '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``'. Exactly
one of this or the preallocated call must be called to prevent stack leaks.
It is undefined behavior to call both a '``llvm.call.preallocated.teardown``'
and the preallocated call for a given '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``'.

For example, if the stack is allocated for a preallocated call by a
'``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``', then an initializer function called on an
allocated argument throws an exception, there should be a
'``llvm.call.preallocated.teardown``' in the exception handler to prevent
stack leaks.

Following the nesting rules in '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``', nested
calls to '``llvm.call.preallocated.setup``' and
'``llvm.call.preallocated.teardown``' are allowed but must be properly
nested.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

        %cs = call token @llvm.call.preallocated.setup(i32 1)
        %x = call ptr @llvm.call.preallocated.arg(token %cs, i32 0) preallocated(i32)
        invoke void @constructor(ptr %x) to label %conta unwind label %contb
    conta:
        call void @foo1(ptr preallocated(i32) %x) ["preallocated"(token %cs)]
        ret void
    contb:
        %s = catchswitch within none [label %catch] unwind to caller
    catch:
        %p = catchpad within %s []
        call void @llvm.call.preallocated.teardown(token %cs)
        ret void

Standard C/C++ Library Intrinsics
---------------------------------

LLVM provides intrinsics for a few important standard C/C++ library
functions. These intrinsics allow source-language front-ends to pass
information about the alignment of the pointer arguments to the code
generator, providing opportunity for more efficient code generation.

.. _int_abs:

'``llvm.abs.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.abs`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.abs.i32(i32 <src>, i1 <is_int_min_poison>)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.abs.v4i32(<4 x i32> <src>, i1 <is_int_min_poison>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.abs``' family of intrinsic functions returns the absolute value
of an argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the value for which the absolute value is to be returned.
This argument may be of any integer type or a vector with integer element type.
The return type must match the first argument type.

The second argument must be a constant and is a flag to indicate whether the
result value of the '``llvm.abs``' intrinsic is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if the first argument is statically or
dynamically an ``INT_MIN`` value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.abs``' intrinsic returns the magnitude (always positive) of the
first argument or each element of a vector argument.". If the first argument is
``INT_MIN``, then the result is also ``INT_MIN`` if ``is_int_min_poison == 0``
and ``poison`` otherwise.


.. _int_smax:

'``llvm.smax.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``@llvm.smax`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.smax.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.smax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

Return the larger of ``%a`` and ``%b`` comparing the values as signed integers.
Vector intrinsics operate on a per-element basis. The larger element of ``%a``
and ``%b`` at a given index is returned for that index.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) may be of any integer type or a vector with
integer element type. The argument types must match each other, and the return
type must match the argument type.


.. _int_smin:

'``llvm.smin.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``@llvm.smin`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.smin.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.smin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

Return the smaller of ``%a`` and ``%b`` comparing the values as signed integers.
Vector intrinsics operate on a per-element basis. The smaller element of ``%a``
and ``%b`` at a given index is returned for that index.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) may be of any integer type or a vector with
integer element type. The argument types must match each other, and the return
type must match the argument type.


.. _int_umax:

'``llvm.umax.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``@llvm.umax`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.umax.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.umax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

Return the larger of ``%a`` and ``%b`` comparing the values as unsigned
integers. Vector intrinsics operate on a per-element basis. The larger element
of ``%a`` and ``%b`` at a given index is returned for that index.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) may be of any integer type or a vector with
integer element type. The argument types must match each other, and the return
type must match the argument type.


.. _int_umin:

'``llvm.umin.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``@llvm.umin`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.umin.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.umin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

Return the smaller of ``%a`` and ``%b`` comparing the values as unsigned
integers. Vector intrinsics operate on a per-element basis. The smaller element
of ``%a`` and ``%b`` at a given index is returned for that index.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) may be of any integer type or a vector with
integer element type. The argument types must match each other, and the return
type must match the argument type.

.. _int_scmp:

'``llvm.scmp.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``@llvm.scmp`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements.

::

      declare i2 @llvm.scmp.i2.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.scmp.v4i32.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

Return ``-1`` if ``%a`` is signed less than ``%b``, ``0`` if they are equal, and 
``1`` if ``%a`` is signed greater than ``%b``. Vector intrinsics operate on a per-element basis. 

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) may be of any integer type or a vector with
integer element type. The argument types must match each other, and the return
type must be at least as wide as ``i2``, to hold the three possible return values.

.. _int_ucmp:

'``llvm.ucmp.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``@llvm.ucmp`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements.

::

      declare i2 @llvm.ucmp.i2.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.ucmp.v4i32.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

Return ``-1`` if ``%a`` is unsigned less than ``%b``, ``0`` if they are equal, and 
``1`` if ``%a`` is unsigned greater than ``%b``. Vector intrinsics operate on a per-element basis. 

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) may be of any integer type or a vector with
integer element type. The argument types must match each other, and the return
type must be at least as wide as ``i2``, to hold the three possible return values.

.. _int_memcpy:

'``llvm.memcpy``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.memcpy`` on any
integer bit width and for different address spaces. Not all targets
support all bit widths however.

::

      declare void @llvm.memcpy.p0.p0.i32(ptr <dest>, ptr <src>,
                                          i32 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)
      declare void @llvm.memcpy.p0.p0.i64(ptr <dest>, ptr <src>,
                                          i64 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memcpy.*``' intrinsics copy a block of memory from the
source location to the destination location.

Note that, unlike the standard libc function, the ``llvm.memcpy.*``
intrinsics do not return a value, takes extra isvolatile
arguments and the pointers can be in specified address spaces.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to the destination, the second is a
pointer to the source. The third argument is an integer argument
specifying the number of bytes to copy, and the fourth is a
boolean indicating a volatile access.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided
for the first and second arguments.

If the ``isvolatile`` parameter is ``true``, the ``llvm.memcpy`` call is
a :ref:`volatile operation <volatile>`. The detailed access behavior is not
very cleanly specified and it is unwise to depend on it.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memcpy.*``' intrinsics copy a block of memory from the source
location to the destination location, which must either be equal or
non-overlapping. It copies "len" bytes of memory over. If the argument is known
to be aligned to some boundary, this can be specified as an attribute on the
argument.

If ``<len>`` is 0, it is no-op modulo the behavior of attributes attached to
the arguments.
If ``<len>`` is not a well-defined value, the behavior is undefined.
If ``<len>`` is not zero, both ``<dest>`` and ``<src>`` should be well-defined,
otherwise the behavior is undefined.

.. _int_memcpy_inline:

'``llvm.memcpy.inline``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.memcpy.inline`` on any
integer bit width and for different address spaces. Not all targets
support all bit widths however.

::

      declare void @llvm.memcpy.inline.p0.p0.i32(ptr <dest>, ptr <src>,
                                                 i32 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)
      declare void @llvm.memcpy.inline.p0.p0.i64(ptr <dest>, ptr <src>,
                                                 i64 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memcpy.inline.*``' intrinsics copy a block of memory from the
source location to the destination location and guarantees that no external
functions are called.

Note that, unlike the standard libc function, the ``llvm.memcpy.inline.*``
intrinsics do not return a value, takes extra isvolatile
arguments and the pointers can be in specified address spaces.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to the destination, the second is a
pointer to the source. The third argument is an integer argument
specifying the number of bytes to copy, and the fourth is a
boolean indicating a volatile access.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided
for the first and second arguments.

If the ``isvolatile`` parameter is ``true``, the ``llvm.memcpy.inline`` call is
a :ref:`volatile operation <volatile>`. The detailed access behavior is not
very cleanly specified and it is unwise to depend on it.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memcpy.inline.*``' intrinsics copy a block of memory from the
source location to the destination location, which are not allowed to
overlap. It copies "len" bytes of memory over. If the argument is known
to be aligned to some boundary, this can be specified as an attribute on
the argument.
The behavior of '``llvm.memcpy.inline.*``' is equivalent to the behavior of
'``llvm.memcpy.*``', but the generated code is guaranteed not to call any
external functions.

.. _int_memmove:

'``llvm.memmove``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use llvm.memmove on any integer
bit width and for different address space. Not all targets support all
bit widths however.

::

      declare void @llvm.memmove.p0.p0.i32(ptr <dest>, ptr <src>,
                                           i32 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)
      declare void @llvm.memmove.p0.p0.i64(ptr <dest>, ptr <src>,
                                           i64 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memmove.*``' intrinsics move a block of memory from the
source location to the destination location. It is similar to the
'``llvm.memcpy``' intrinsic but allows the two memory locations to
overlap.

Note that, unlike the standard libc function, the ``llvm.memmove.*``
intrinsics do not return a value, takes an extra isvolatile
argument and the pointers can be in specified address spaces.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to the destination, the second is a
pointer to the source. The third argument is an integer argument
specifying the number of bytes to copy, and the fourth is a
boolean indicating a volatile access.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided
for the first and second arguments.

If the ``isvolatile`` parameter is ``true``, the ``llvm.memmove`` call
is a :ref:`volatile operation <volatile>`. The detailed access behavior is
not very cleanly specified and it is unwise to depend on it.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memmove.*``' intrinsics copy a block of memory from the
source location to the destination location, which may overlap. It
copies "len" bytes of memory over. If the argument is known to be
aligned to some boundary, this can be specified as an attribute on
the argument.

If ``<len>`` is 0, it is no-op modulo the behavior of attributes attached to
the arguments.
If ``<len>`` is not a well-defined value, the behavior is undefined.
If ``<len>`` is not zero, both ``<dest>`` and ``<src>`` should be well-defined,
otherwise the behavior is undefined.

.. _int_memset:

'``llvm.memset.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use llvm.memset on any integer
bit width and for different address spaces. However, not all targets
support all bit widths.

::

      declare void @llvm.memset.p0.i32(ptr <dest>, i8 <val>,
                                       i32 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)
      declare void @llvm.memset.p0.i64(ptr <dest>, i8 <val>,
                                       i64 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memset.*``' intrinsics fill a block of memory with a
particular byte value.

Note that, unlike the standard libc function, the ``llvm.memset``
intrinsic does not return a value and takes an extra volatile
argument. Also, the destination can be in an arbitrary address space.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to the destination to fill, the second
is the byte value with which to fill it, the third argument is an
integer argument specifying the number of bytes to fill, and the fourth
is a boolean indicating a volatile access.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided
for the first arguments.

If the ``isvolatile`` parameter is ``true``, the ``llvm.memset`` call is
a :ref:`volatile operation <volatile>`. The detailed access behavior is not
very cleanly specified and it is unwise to depend on it.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memset.*``' intrinsics fill "len" bytes of memory starting
at the destination location. If the argument is known to be
aligned to some boundary, this can be specified as an attribute on
the argument.

If ``<len>`` is 0, it is no-op modulo the behavior of attributes attached to
the arguments.
If ``<len>`` is not a well-defined value, the behavior is undefined.
If ``<len>`` is not zero, ``<dest>`` should be well-defined, otherwise the
behavior is undefined.

.. _int_memset_inline:

'``llvm.memset.inline``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.memset.inline`` on any
integer bit width and for different address spaces. Not all targets
support all bit widths however.

::

      declare void @llvm.memset.inline.p0.p0i8.i32(ptr <dest>, i8 <val>,
                                                   i32 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)
      declare void @llvm.memset.inline.p0.p0.i64(ptr <dest>, i8 <val>,
                                                 i64 <len>, i1 <isvolatile>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memset.inline.*``' intrinsics fill a block of memory with a
particular byte value and guarantees that no external functions are called.

Note that, unlike the standard libc function, the ``llvm.memset.inline.*``
intrinsics do not return a value, take an extra isvolatile argument and the
pointer can be in specified address spaces.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to the destination to fill, the second
is the byte value with which to fill it, the third argument is a constant
integer argument specifying the number of bytes to fill, and the fourth
is a boolean indicating a volatile access.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided
for the first argument.

If the ``isvolatile`` parameter is ``true``, the ``llvm.memset.inline`` call is
a :ref:`volatile operation <volatile>`. The detailed access behavior is not
very cleanly specified and it is unwise to depend on it.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memset.inline.*``' intrinsics fill "len" bytes of memory starting
at the destination location. If the argument is known to be
aligned to some boundary, this can be specified as an attribute on
the argument.

If ``<len>`` is 0, it is no-op modulo the behavior of attributes attached to
the arguments.
If ``<len>`` is not a well-defined value, the behavior is undefined.
If ``<len>`` is not zero, ``<dest>`` should be well-defined, otherwise the
behavior is undefined.

The behavior of '``llvm.memset.inline.*``' is equivalent to the behavior of
'``llvm.memset.*``', but the generated code is guaranteed not to call any
external functions.

.. _int_sqrt:

'``llvm.sqrt.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sqrt`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.sqrt.f32(float %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.sqrt.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.sqrt.f80(x86_fp80 %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.sqrt.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.sqrt.ppcf128(ppc_fp128 %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sqrt``' intrinsics return the square root of the specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``sqrt``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``. For types specified by IEEE-754, the result
matches a conforming libm implementation.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.powi.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.powi`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

Generally, the only supported type for the exponent is the one matching
with the C type ``int``.

::

      declare float     @llvm.powi.f32.i32(float  %Val, i32 %power)
      declare double    @llvm.powi.f64.i16(double %Val, i16 %power)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.powi.f80.i32(x86_fp80  %Val, i32 %power)
      declare fp128     @llvm.powi.f128.i32(fp128 %Val, i32 %power)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.powi.ppcf128.i32(ppc_fp128  %Val, i32 %power)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.powi.*``' intrinsics return the first operand raised to the
specified (positive or negative) power. The order of evaluation of
multiplications is not defined. When a vector of floating-point type is
used, the second argument remains a scalar integer value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The second argument is an integer power, and the first is a value to
raise to that power.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the first value raised to the second power with an
unspecified sequence of rounding operations.

'``llvm.sin.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sin`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.sin.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.sin.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.sin.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.sin.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.sin.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sin.*``' intrinsics return the sine of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``sin``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.cos.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.cos`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.cos.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.cos.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.cos.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.cos.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.cos.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.cos.*``' intrinsics return the cosine of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``cos``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.tan.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.tan`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.tan.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.tan.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.tan.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.tan.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.tan.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.tan.*``' intrinsics return the tangent of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``tan``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.asin.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.asin`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.asin.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.asin.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.asin.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.asin.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.asin.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.asin.*``' intrinsics return the arcsine of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``asin``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.acos.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.acos`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.acos.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.acos.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.acos.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.acos.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.acos.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.acos.*``' intrinsics return the arccosine of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``acos``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.atan.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.atan`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.atan.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.atan.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.atan.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.atan.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.atan.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.atan.*``' intrinsics return the arctangent of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``atan``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.sinh.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sinh`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.sinh.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.sinh.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.sinh.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.sinh.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.sinh.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sinh.*``' intrinsics return the hyperbolic sine of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``sinh``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.cosh.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.cosh`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.cosh.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.cosh.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.cosh.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.cosh.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.cosh.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.cosh.*``' intrinsics return the hyperbolic cosine of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``cosh``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.tanh.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.tanh`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.tanh.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.tanh.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.tanh.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.tanh.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.tanh.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.tanh.*``' intrinsics return the hyperbolic tangent of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``tanh``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

'``llvm.pow.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.pow`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.pow.f32(float  %Val, float %Power)
      declare double    @llvm.pow.f64(double %Val, double %Power)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.pow.f80(x86_fp80  %Val, x86_fp80 %Power)
      declare fp128     @llvm.pow.f128(fp128 %Val, fp128 %Power)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.pow.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val, ppc_fp128 Power)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.pow.*``' intrinsics return the first operand raised to the
specified (positive or negative) power.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``pow``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

.. _int_exp:

'``llvm.exp.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.exp`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.exp.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.exp.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.exp.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.exp.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.exp.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.exp.*``' intrinsics compute the base-e exponential of the specified
value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``exp``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

.. _int_exp2:

'``llvm.exp2.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.exp2`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.exp2.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.exp2.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.exp2.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.exp2.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.exp2.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.exp2.*``' intrinsics compute the base-2 exponential of the
specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``exp2``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

.. _int_exp10:

'``llvm.exp10.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.exp10`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.exp10.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.exp10.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.exp10.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.exp10.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.exp10.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.exp10.*``' intrinsics compute the base-10 exponential of the
specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``exp10``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.


'``llvm.ldexp.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.ldexp`` on any
floating point or vector of floating point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.ldexp.f32.i32(float %Val, i32 %Exp)
      declare double    @llvm.ldexp.f64.i32(double %Val, i32 %Exp)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.ldexp.f80.i32(x86_fp80 %Val, i32 %Exp)
      declare fp128     @llvm.ldexp.f128.i32(fp128 %Val, i32 %Exp)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.ldexp.ppcf128.i32(ppc_fp128 %Val, i32 %Exp)
      declare <2 x float> @llvm.ldexp.v2f32.v2i32(<2 x float> %Val, <2 x i32> %Exp)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ldexp.*``' intrinsics perform the ldexp function.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of floating-point values of
the same type. The second argument is an integer with the same number
of elements.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function multiplies the first argument by 2 raised to the second
argument's power. If the first argument is NaN or infinite, the same
value is returned. If the result underflows a zero with the same sign
is returned. If the result overflows, the result is an infinity with
the same sign.

.. _int_frexp:

'``llvm.frexp.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.frexp`` on any
floating point or vector of floating point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare { float, i32 }     @llvm.frexp.f32.i32(float %Val)
      declare { double, i32 }    @llvm.frexp.f64.i32(double %Val)
      declare { x86_fp80, i32 }  @llvm.frexp.f80.i32(x86_fp80 %Val)
      declare { fp128, i32 }     @llvm.frexp.f128.i32(fp128 %Val)
      declare { ppc_fp128, i32 } @llvm.frexp.ppcf128.i32(ppc_fp128 %Val)
      declare { <2 x float>, <2 x i32> }  @llvm.frexp.v2f32.v2i32(<2 x float> %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.frexp.*``' intrinsics perform the frexp function.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or
:ref:`vector <t_vector>` of floating-point values. Returns two values
in a struct. The first struct field matches the argument type, and the
second field is an integer or a vector of integer values with the same
number of elements as the argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic splits a floating point value into a normalized
fractional component and integral exponent.

For a non-zero argument, returns the argument multiplied by some power
of two such that the absolute value of the returned value is in the
range [0.5, 1.0), with the same sign as the argument. The second
result is an integer such that the first result raised to the power of
the second result is the input argument.

If the argument is a zero, returns a zero with the same sign and a 0
exponent.

If the argument is a NaN, a NaN is returned and the returned exponent
is unspecified.

If the argument is an infinity, returns an infinity with the same sign
and an unspecified exponent.

.. _int_log:

'``llvm.log.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.log`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.log.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.log.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.log.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.log.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.log.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.log.*``' intrinsics compute the base-e logarithm of the specified
value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``log``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

.. _int_log10:

'``llvm.log10.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.log10`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.log10.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.log10.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.log10.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.log10.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.log10.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.log10.*``' intrinsics compute the base-10 logarithm of the
specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``log10``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.


.. _int_log2:

'``llvm.log2.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.log2`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.log2.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.log2.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.log2.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.log2.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.log2.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.log2.*``' intrinsics compute the base-2 logarithm of the specified
value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as a corresponding libm '``log2``' function but without
trapping or setting ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

.. _int_fma:

'``llvm.fma.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.fma`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.fma.f32(float  %a, float  %b, float  %c)
      declare double    @llvm.fma.f64(double %a, double %b, double %c)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.fma.f80(x86_fp80 %a, x86_fp80 %b, x86_fp80 %c)
      declare fp128     @llvm.fma.f128(fp128 %a, fp128 %b, fp128 %c)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.fma.ppcf128(ppc_fp128 %a, ppc_fp128 %b, ppc_fp128 %c)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.fma.*``' intrinsics perform the fused multiply-add operation.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Return the same value as the IEEE-754 fusedMultiplyAdd operation. This
is assumed to not trap or set ``errno``.

When specified with the fast-math-flag 'afn', the result may be approximated
using a less accurate calculation.

.. _int_fabs:

'``llvm.fabs.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.fabs`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.fabs.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.fabs.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.fabs.f80(x86_fp80 %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.fabs.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.fabs.ppcf128(ppc_fp128 %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.fabs.*``' intrinsics return the absolute value of the
operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``fabs`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.
The returned value is completely identical to the input except for the sign bit;
in particular, if the input is a NaN, then the quiet/signaling bit and payload
are perfectly preserved.

.. _i_minnum:

'``llvm.minnum.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.minnum`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.minnum.f32(float %Val0, float %Val1)
      declare double    @llvm.minnum.f64(double %Val0, double %Val1)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.minnum.f80(x86_fp80 %Val0, x86_fp80 %Val1)
      declare fp128     @llvm.minnum.f128(fp128 %Val0, fp128 %Val1)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.minnum.ppcf128(ppc_fp128 %Val0, ppc_fp128 %Val1)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.minnum.*``' intrinsics return the minimum of the two
arguments.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Follows the IEEE-754 semantics for minNum, except for handling of
signaling NaNs. This match's the behavior of libm's fmin.

If either operand is a NaN, returns the other non-NaN operand. Returns
NaN only if both operands are NaN. If the operands compare equal,
returns either one of the operands. For example, this means that
fmin(+0.0, -0.0) returns either operand.

Unlike the IEEE-754 2008 behavior, this does not distinguish between
signaling and quiet NaN inputs. If a target's implementation follows
the standard and returns a quiet NaN if either input is a signaling
NaN, the intrinsic lowering is responsible for quieting the inputs to
correctly return the non-NaN input (e.g. by using the equivalent of
``llvm.canonicalize``).

.. _i_maxnum:

'``llvm.maxnum.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.maxnum`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.maxnum.f32(float  %Val0, float  %Val1)
      declare double    @llvm.maxnum.f64(double %Val0, double %Val1)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.maxnum.f80(x86_fp80  %Val0, x86_fp80  %Val1)
      declare fp128     @llvm.maxnum.f128(fp128 %Val0, fp128 %Val1)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.maxnum.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val0, ppc_fp128  %Val1)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.maxnum.*``' intrinsics return the maximum of the two
arguments.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""
Follows the IEEE-754 semantics for maxNum except for the handling of
signaling NaNs. This matches the behavior of libm's fmax.

If either operand is a NaN, returns the other non-NaN operand. Returns
NaN only if both operands are NaN. If the operands compare equal,
returns either one of the operands. For example, this means that
fmax(+0.0, -0.0) returns either -0.0 or 0.0.

Unlike the IEEE-754 2008 behavior, this does not distinguish between
signaling and quiet NaN inputs. If a target's implementation follows
the standard and returns a quiet NaN if either input is a signaling
NaN, the intrinsic lowering is responsible for quieting the inputs to
correctly return the non-NaN input (e.g. by using the equivalent of
``llvm.canonicalize``).

.. _i_minimum:

'``llvm.minimum.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.minimum`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.minimum.f32(float %Val0, float %Val1)
      declare double    @llvm.minimum.f64(double %Val0, double %Val1)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.minimum.f80(x86_fp80 %Val0, x86_fp80 %Val1)
      declare fp128     @llvm.minimum.f128(fp128 %Val0, fp128 %Val1)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.minimum.ppcf128(ppc_fp128 %Val0, ppc_fp128 %Val1)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.minimum.*``' intrinsics return the minimum of the two
arguments, propagating NaNs and treating -0.0 as less than +0.0.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""
If either operand is a NaN, returns NaN. Otherwise returns the lesser
of the two arguments. -0.0 is considered to be less than +0.0 for this
intrinsic. Note that these are the semantics specified in the draft of
IEEE 754-2019.

.. _i_maximum:

'``llvm.maximum.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.maximum`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.maximum.f32(float %Val0, float %Val1)
      declare double    @llvm.maximum.f64(double %Val0, double %Val1)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.maximum.f80(x86_fp80 %Val0, x86_fp80 %Val1)
      declare fp128     @llvm.maximum.f128(fp128 %Val0, fp128 %Val1)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.maximum.ppcf128(ppc_fp128 %Val0, ppc_fp128 %Val1)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.maximum.*``' intrinsics return the maximum of the two
arguments, propagating NaNs and treating -0.0 as less than +0.0.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""
If either operand is a NaN, returns NaN. Otherwise returns the greater
of the two arguments. -0.0 is considered to be less than +0.0 for this
intrinsic. Note that these are the semantics specified in the draft of
IEEE 754-2019.

.. _int_copysign:

'``llvm.copysign.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.copysign`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.copysign.f32(float  %Mag, float  %Sgn)
      declare double    @llvm.copysign.f64(double %Mag, double %Sgn)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.copysign.f80(x86_fp80  %Mag, x86_fp80  %Sgn)
      declare fp128     @llvm.copysign.f128(fp128 %Mag, fp128 %Sgn)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.copysign.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Mag, ppc_fp128  %Sgn)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.copysign.*``' intrinsics return a value with the magnitude of the
first operand and the sign of the second operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``copysign``
functions would, and handles error conditions in the same way.
The returned value is completely identical to the first operand except for the
sign bit; in particular, if the input is a NaN, then the quiet/signaling bit and
payload are perfectly preserved.

.. _int_floor:

'``llvm.floor.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.floor`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.floor.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.floor.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.floor.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.floor.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.floor.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.floor.*``' intrinsics return the floor of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``floor`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.

.. _int_ceil:

'``llvm.ceil.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.ceil`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.ceil.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.ceil.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.ceil.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.ceil.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.ceil.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ceil.*``' intrinsics return the ceiling of the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``ceil`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.


.. _int_llvm_trunc:

'``llvm.trunc.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.trunc`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.trunc.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.trunc.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.trunc.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.trunc.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.trunc.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.trunc.*``' intrinsics returns the operand rounded to the
nearest integer not larger in magnitude than the operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``trunc`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.

.. _int_rint:

'``llvm.rint.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.rint`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.rint.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.rint.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.rint.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.rint.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.rint.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.rint.*``' intrinsics returns the operand rounded to the
nearest integer. It may raise an inexact floating-point exception if the
operand isn't an integer.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``rint`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way. Since LLVM assumes the
:ref:`default floating-point environment <floatenv>`, the rounding mode is
assumed to be set to "nearest", so halfway cases are rounded to the even
integer. Use :ref:`Constrained Floating-Point Intrinsics <constrainedfp>`
to avoid that assumption.

.. _int_nearbyint:

'``llvm.nearbyint.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.nearbyint`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.nearbyint.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.nearbyint.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.nearbyint.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.nearbyint.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.nearbyint.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.nearbyint.*``' intrinsics returns the operand rounded to the
nearest integer.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``nearbyint``
functions would, and handles error conditions in the same way. Since LLVM
assumes the :ref:`default floating-point environment <floatenv>`, the rounding
mode is assumed to be set to "nearest", so halfway cases are rounded to the even
integer. Use :ref:`Constrained Floating-Point Intrinsics <constrainedfp>` to
avoid that assumption.

.. _int_round:

'``llvm.round.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.round`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.round.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.round.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.round.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.round.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.round.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.round.*``' intrinsics returns the operand rounded to the
nearest integer.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``round``
functions would, and handles error conditions in the same way.

.. _int_roundeven:

'``llvm.roundeven.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.roundeven`` on any
floating-point or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets support
all types however.

::

      declare float     @llvm.roundeven.f32(float  %Val)
      declare double    @llvm.roundeven.f64(double %Val)
      declare x86_fp80  @llvm.roundeven.f80(x86_fp80  %Val)
      declare fp128     @llvm.roundeven.f128(fp128 %Val)
      declare ppc_fp128 @llvm.roundeven.ppcf128(ppc_fp128  %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.roundeven.*``' intrinsics returns the operand rounded to the nearest
integer in floating-point format rounding halfway cases to even (that is, to the
nearest value that is an even integer).

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument and return value are floating-point numbers of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function implements IEEE-754 operation ``roundToIntegralTiesToEven``. It
also behaves in the same way as C standard function ``roundeven``, except that
it does not raise floating point exceptions.


'``llvm.lround.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.lround`` on any
floating-point type. Not all targets support all types however.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.lround.i32.f32(float %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lround.i32.f64(double %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lround.i32.f80(float %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lround.i32.f128(double %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lround.i32.ppcf128(double %Val)

      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f32(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f64(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f80(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f128(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.ppcf128(double %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.lround.*``' intrinsics return the operand rounded to the nearest
integer with ties away from zero.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a floating-point number and the return value is an integer
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``lround`` functions
would, but without setting errno. If the rounded value is too large to
be stored in the result type, the return value is a non-deterministic
value (equivalent to `freeze poison`).

'``llvm.llround.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.llround`` on any
floating-point type. Not all targets support all types however.

::

      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f32(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f64(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f80(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.f128(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lround.i64.ppcf128(double %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.llround.*``' intrinsics return the operand rounded to the nearest
integer with ties away from zero.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a floating-point number and the return value is an integer
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``llround``
functions would, but without setting errno. If the rounded value is
too large to be stored in the result type, the return value is a
non-deterministic value (equivalent to `freeze poison`).

.. _int_lrint:

'``llvm.lrint.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.lrint`` on any
floating-point type or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets
support all types however.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.lrint.i32.f32(float %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lrint.i32.f64(double %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lrint.i32.f80(float %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lrint.i32.f128(double %Val)
      declare i32 @llvm.lrint.i32.ppcf128(double %Val)

      declare i64 @llvm.lrint.i64.f32(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lrint.i64.f64(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lrint.i64.f80(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lrint.i64.f128(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.lrint.i64.ppcf128(double %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.lrint.*``' intrinsics return the operand rounded to the nearest
integer.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a floating-point number and the return value is an integer
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``lrint`` functions
would, but without setting errno. If the rounded value is too large to
be stored in the result type, the return value is a non-deterministic
value (equivalent to `freeze poison`).

.. _int_llrint:

'``llvm.llrint.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.llrint`` on any
floating-point type or vector of floating-point type. Not all targets
support all types however.

::

      declare i64 @llvm.llrint.i64.f32(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.llrint.i64.f64(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.llrint.i64.f80(float %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.llrint.i64.f128(double %Val)
      declare i64 @llvm.llrint.i64.ppcf128(double %Val)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.llrint.*``' intrinsics return the operand rounded to the nearest
integer.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a floating-point number and the return value is an integer
type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``llrint`` functions
would, but without setting errno. If the rounded value is too large to
be stored in the result type, the return value is a non-deterministic
value (equivalent to `freeze poison`).

Bit Manipulation Intrinsics
---------------------------

LLVM provides intrinsics for a few important bit manipulation
operations. These allow efficient code generation for some algorithms.

.. _int_bitreverse:

'``llvm.bitreverse.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic function. You can use bitreverse on any
integer type.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.bitreverse.i16(i16 <id>)
      declare i32 @llvm.bitreverse.i32(i32 <id>)
      declare i64 @llvm.bitreverse.i64(i64 <id>)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.bitreverse.v4i32(<4 x i32> <id>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.bitreverse``' family of intrinsics is used to reverse the
bitpattern of an integer value or vector of integer values; for example
``0b10110110`` becomes ``0b01101101``.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.bitreverse.iN`` intrinsic returns an iN value that has bit
``M`` in the input moved to bit ``N-M-1`` in the output. The vector
intrinsics, such as ``llvm.bitreverse.v4i32``, operate on a per-element
basis and the element order is not affected.

.. _int_bswap:

'``llvm.bswap.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic function. You can use bswap on any
integer type that is an even number of bytes (i.e. BitWidth % 16 == 0).

::

      declare i16 @llvm.bswap.i16(i16 <id>)
      declare i32 @llvm.bswap.i32(i32 <id>)
      declare i64 @llvm.bswap.i64(i64 <id>)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.bswap.v4i32(<4 x i32> <id>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.bswap``' family of intrinsics is used to byte swap an integer
value or vector of integer values with an even number of bytes (positive
multiple of 16 bits).

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.bswap.i16`` intrinsic returns an i16 value that has the high
and low byte of the input i16 swapped. Similarly, the ``llvm.bswap.i32``
intrinsic returns an i32 value that has the four bytes of the input i32
swapped, so that if the input bytes are numbered 0, 1, 2, 3 then the
returned i32 will have its bytes in 3, 2, 1, 0 order. The
``llvm.bswap.i48``, ``llvm.bswap.i64`` and other intrinsics extend this
concept to additional even-byte lengths (6 bytes, 8 bytes and more,
respectively). The vector intrinsics, such as ``llvm.bswap.v4i32``,
operate on a per-element basis and the element order is not affected.

.. _int_ctpop:

'``llvm.ctpop.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use llvm.ctpop on any integer
bit width, or on any vector with integer elements. Not all targets
support all bit widths or vector types, however.

::

      declare i8 @llvm.ctpop.i8(i8  <src>)
      declare i16 @llvm.ctpop.i16(i16 <src>)
      declare i32 @llvm.ctpop.i32(i32 <src>)
      declare i64 @llvm.ctpop.i64(i64 <src>)
      declare i256 @llvm.ctpop.i256(i256 <src>)
      declare <2 x i32> @llvm.ctpop.v2i32(<2 x i32> <src>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ctpop``' family of intrinsics counts the number of bits set
in a value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The only argument is the value to be counted. The argument may be of any
integer type, or a vector with integer elements. The return type must
match the argument type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.ctpop``' intrinsic counts the 1's in a variable, or within
each element of a vector.

.. _int_ctlz:

'``llvm.ctlz.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.ctlz`` on any
integer bit width, or any vector whose elements are integers. Not all
targets support all bit widths or vector types, however.

::

      declare i8   @llvm.ctlz.i8  (i8   <src>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)
      declare <2 x i37> @llvm.ctlz.v2i37(<2 x i37> <src>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ctlz``' family of intrinsic functions counts the number of
leading zeros in a variable.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the value to be counted. This argument may be of
any integer type, or a vector with integer element type. The return
type must match the first argument type.

The second argument is a constant flag that indicates whether the intrinsic
returns a valid result if the first argument is zero. If the first
argument is zero and the second argument is true, the result is poison.
Historically some architectures did not provide a defined result for zero
values as efficiently, and many algorithms are now predicated on avoiding
zero-value inputs.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.ctlz``' intrinsic counts the leading (most significant)
zeros in a variable, or within each element of the vector. If
``src == 0`` then the result is the size in bits of the type of ``src``
if ``is_zero_poison == 0`` and ``poison`` otherwise. For example,
``llvm.ctlz(i32 2) = 30``.

.. _int_cttz:

'``llvm.cttz.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.cttz`` on any
integer bit width, or any vector of integer elements. Not all targets
support all bit widths or vector types, however.

::

      declare i42   @llvm.cttz.i42  (i42   <src>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)
      declare <2 x i32> @llvm.cttz.v2i32(<2 x i32> <src>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.cttz``' family of intrinsic functions counts the number of
trailing zeros.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the value to be counted. This argument may be of
any integer type, or a vector with integer element type. The return
type must match the first argument type.

The second argument is a constant flag that indicates whether the intrinsic
returns a valid result if the first argument is zero. If the first
argument is zero and the second argument is true, the result is poison.
Historically some architectures did not provide a defined result for zero
values as efficiently, and many algorithms are now predicated on avoiding
zero-value inputs.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.cttz``' intrinsic counts the trailing (least significant)
zeros in a variable, or within each element of a vector. If ``src == 0``
then the result is the size in bits of the type of ``src`` if
``is_zero_poison == 0`` and ``poison`` otherwise. For example,
``llvm.cttz(2) = 1``.

.. _int_overflow:

.. _int_fshl:

'``llvm.fshl.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.fshl`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements. Not all targets
support all bit widths or vector types, however.

::

      declare i8  @llvm.fshl.i8 (i8 %a, i8 %b, i8 %c)
      declare i64 @llvm.fshl.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i64 %c)
      declare <2 x i32> @llvm.fshl.v2i32(<2 x i32> %a, <2 x i32> %b, <2 x i32> %c)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.fshl``' family of intrinsic functions performs a funnel shift left:
the first two values are concatenated as { %a : %b } (%a is the most significant
bits of the wide value), the combined value is shifted left, and the most
significant bits are extracted to produce a result that is the same size as the
original arguments. If the first 2 arguments are identical, this is equivalent
to a rotate left operation. For vector types, the operation occurs for each
element of the vector. The shift argument is treated as an unsigned amount
modulo the element size of the arguments.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments are the values to be concatenated. The third
argument is the shift amount. The arguments may be any integer type or a
vector with integer element type. All arguments and the return value must
have the same type.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshl.i8(i8 %x, i8 %y, i8 %z)  ; %r = i8: msb_extract((concat(x, y) << (z % 8)), 8)
      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshl.i8(i8 255, i8 0, i8 15)  ; %r = i8: 128 (0b10000000)
      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshl.i8(i8 15, i8 15, i8 11)  ; %r = i8: 120 (0b01111000)
      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshl.i8(i8 0, i8 255, i8 8)   ; %r = i8: 0   (0b00000000)

.. _int_fshr:

'``llvm.fshr.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.fshr`` on any
integer bit width or any vector of integer elements. Not all targets
support all bit widths or vector types, however.

::

      declare i8  @llvm.fshr.i8 (i8 %a, i8 %b, i8 %c)
      declare i64 @llvm.fshr.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i64 %c)
      declare <2 x i32> @llvm.fshr.v2i32(<2 x i32> %a, <2 x i32> %b, <2 x i32> %c)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.fshr``' family of intrinsic functions performs a funnel shift right:
the first two values are concatenated as { %a : %b } (%a is the most significant
bits of the wide value), the combined value is shifted right, and the least
significant bits are extracted to produce a result that is the same size as the
original arguments. If the first 2 arguments are identical, this is equivalent
to a rotate right operation. For vector types, the operation occurs for each
element of the vector. The shift argument is treated as an unsigned amount
modulo the element size of the arguments.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments are the values to be concatenated. The third
argument is the shift amount. The arguments may be any integer type or a
vector with integer element type. All arguments and the return value must
have the same type.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshr.i8(i8 %x, i8 %y, i8 %z)  ; %r = i8: lsb_extract((concat(x, y) >> (z % 8)), 8)
      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshr.i8(i8 255, i8 0, i8 15)  ; %r = i8: 254 (0b11111110)
      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshr.i8(i8 15, i8 15, i8 11)  ; %r = i8: 225 (0b11100001)
      %r = call i8 @llvm.fshr.i8(i8 0, i8 255, i8 8)   ; %r = i8: 255 (0b11111111)

Arithmetic with Overflow Intrinsics
-----------------------------------

LLVM provides intrinsics for fast arithmetic overflow checking.

Each of these intrinsics returns a two-element struct. The first
element of this struct contains the result of the corresponding
arithmetic operation modulo 2\ :sup:`n`\ , where n is the bit width of
the result. Therefore, for example, the first element of the struct
returned by ``llvm.sadd.with.overflow.i32`` is always the same as the
result of a 32-bit ``add`` instruction with the same operands, where
the ``add`` is *not* modified by an ``nsw`` or ``nuw`` flag.

The second element of the result is an ``i1`` that is 1 if the
arithmetic operation overflowed and 0 otherwise. An operation
overflows if, for any values of its operands ``A`` and ``B`` and for
any ``N`` larger than the operands' width, ``ext(A op B) to iN`` is
not equal to ``(ext(A) to iN) op (ext(B) to iN)`` where ``ext`` is
``sext`` for signed overflow and ``zext`` for unsigned overflow, and
``op`` is the underlying arithmetic operation.

The behavior of these intrinsics is well-defined for all argument
values.

'``llvm.sadd.with.overflow.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sadd.with.overflow``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare {i16, i1} @llvm.sadd.with.overflow.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare {i32, i1} @llvm.sadd.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare {i64, i1} @llvm.sadd.with.overflow.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare {<4 x i32>, <4 x i1>} @llvm.sadd.with.overflow.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sadd.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
a signed addition of the two arguments, and indicate whether an overflow
occurred during the signed summation.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the first element of the result structure
may be of integer types of any bit width, but they must have the same
bit width. The second element of the result structure must be of type
``i1``. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two values that will undergo signed
addition.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.sadd.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
a signed addition of the two variables. They return a structure --- the
first element of which is the signed summation, and the second element
of which is a bit specifying if the signed summation resulted in an
overflow.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call {i32, i1} @llvm.sadd.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      %sum = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 0
      %obit = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 1
      br i1 %obit, label %overflow, label %normal

'``llvm.uadd.with.overflow.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.uadd.with.overflow``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare {i16, i1} @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare {i32, i1} @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare {i64, i1} @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare {<4 x i32>, <4 x i1>} @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.uadd.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
an unsigned addition of the two arguments, and indicate whether a carry
occurred during the unsigned summation.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the first element of the result structure
may be of integer types of any bit width, but they must have the same
bit width. The second element of the result structure must be of type
``i1``. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two values that will undergo unsigned
addition.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.uadd.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
an unsigned addition of the two arguments. They return a structure --- the
first element of which is the sum, and the second element of which is a
bit specifying if the unsigned summation resulted in a carry.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call {i32, i1} @llvm.uadd.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      %sum = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 0
      %obit = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 1
      br i1 %obit, label %carry, label %normal

'``llvm.ssub.with.overflow.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.ssub.with.overflow``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare {i16, i1} @llvm.ssub.with.overflow.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare {i32, i1} @llvm.ssub.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare {i64, i1} @llvm.ssub.with.overflow.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare {<4 x i32>, <4 x i1>} @llvm.ssub.with.overflow.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ssub.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
a signed subtraction of the two arguments, and indicate whether an
overflow occurred during the signed subtraction.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the first element of the result structure
may be of integer types of any bit width, but they must have the same
bit width. The second element of the result structure must be of type
``i1``. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two values that will undergo signed
subtraction.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.ssub.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
a signed subtraction of the two arguments. They return a structure --- the
first element of which is the subtraction, and the second element of
which is a bit specifying if the signed subtraction resulted in an
overflow.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call {i32, i1} @llvm.ssub.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      %sum = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 0
      %obit = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 1
      br i1 %obit, label %overflow, label %normal

'``llvm.usub.with.overflow.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.usub.with.overflow``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare {i16, i1} @llvm.usub.with.overflow.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare {i32, i1} @llvm.usub.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare {i64, i1} @llvm.usub.with.overflow.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare {<4 x i32>, <4 x i1>} @llvm.usub.with.overflow.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.usub.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
an unsigned subtraction of the two arguments, and indicate whether an
overflow occurred during the unsigned subtraction.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the first element of the result structure
may be of integer types of any bit width, but they must have the same
bit width. The second element of the result structure must be of type
``i1``. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two values that will undergo unsigned
subtraction.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.usub.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
an unsigned subtraction of the two arguments. They return a structure ---
the first element of which is the subtraction, and the second element of
which is a bit specifying if the unsigned subtraction resulted in an
overflow.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call {i32, i1} @llvm.usub.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      %sum = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 0
      %obit = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 1
      br i1 %obit, label %overflow, label %normal

'``llvm.smul.with.overflow.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.smul.with.overflow``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare {i16, i1} @llvm.smul.with.overflow.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare {i32, i1} @llvm.smul.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare {i64, i1} @llvm.smul.with.overflow.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare {<4 x i32>, <4 x i1>} @llvm.smul.with.overflow.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.smul.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
a signed multiplication of the two arguments, and indicate whether an
overflow occurred during the signed multiplication.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the first element of the result structure
may be of integer types of any bit width, but they must have the same
bit width. The second element of the result structure must be of type
``i1``. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two values that will undergo signed
multiplication.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.smul.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
a signed multiplication of the two arguments. They return a structure ---
the first element of which is the multiplication, and the second element
of which is a bit specifying if the signed multiplication resulted in an
overflow.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call {i32, i1} @llvm.smul.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      %sum = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 0
      %obit = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 1
      br i1 %obit, label %overflow, label %normal

'``llvm.umul.with.overflow.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.umul.with.overflow``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare {i16, i1} @llvm.umul.with.overflow.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare {i32, i1} @llvm.umul.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare {i64, i1} @llvm.umul.with.overflow.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare {<4 x i32>, <4 x i1>} @llvm.umul.with.overflow.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.umul.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
a unsigned multiplication of the two arguments, and indicate whether an
overflow occurred during the unsigned multiplication.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the first element of the result structure
may be of integer types of any bit width, but they must have the same
bit width. The second element of the result structure must be of type
``i1``. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two values that will undergo unsigned
multiplication.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.umul.with.overflow``' family of intrinsic functions perform
an unsigned multiplication of the two arguments. They return a structure ---
the first element of which is the multiplication, and the second
element of which is a bit specifying if the unsigned multiplication
resulted in an overflow.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call {i32, i1} @llvm.umul.with.overflow.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      %sum = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 0
      %obit = extractvalue {i32, i1} %res, 1
      br i1 %obit, label %overflow, label %normal

Saturation Arithmetic Intrinsics
---------------------------------

Saturation arithmetic is a version of arithmetic in which operations are
limited to a fixed range between a minimum and maximum value. If the result of
an operation is greater than the maximum value, the result is set (or
"clamped") to this maximum. If it is below the minimum, it is clamped to this
minimum.

.. _int_sadd_sat:

'``llvm.sadd.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sadd.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.sadd.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare i32 @llvm.sadd.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare i64 @llvm.sadd.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.sadd.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sadd.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform signed
saturating addition on the 2 arguments.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo signed addition.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest signed value
representable by the bit width of the arguments. The minimum value is the
smallest signed value representable by this bit width.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.sadd.sat.i4(i4 1, i4 2)  ; %res = 3
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sadd.sat.i4(i4 5, i4 6)  ; %res = 7
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sadd.sat.i4(i4 -4, i4 2)  ; %res = -2
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sadd.sat.i4(i4 -4, i4 -5)  ; %res = -8


.. _int_uadd_sat:

'``llvm.uadd.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.uadd.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.uadd.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare i32 @llvm.uadd.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare i64 @llvm.uadd.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.uadd.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.uadd.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform unsigned
saturating addition on the 2 arguments.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo unsigned addition.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest unsigned value
representable by the bit width of the arguments. Because this is an unsigned
operation, the result will never saturate towards zero.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.uadd.sat.i4(i4 1, i4 2)  ; %res = 3
      %res = call i4 @llvm.uadd.sat.i4(i4 5, i4 6)  ; %res = 11
      %res = call i4 @llvm.uadd.sat.i4(i4 8, i4 8)  ; %res = 15


.. _int_ssub_sat:

'``llvm.ssub.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.ssub.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.ssub.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare i32 @llvm.ssub.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare i64 @llvm.ssub.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.ssub.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ssub.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform signed
saturating subtraction on the 2 arguments.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo signed subtraction.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest signed value
representable by the bit width of the arguments. The minimum value is the
smallest signed value representable by this bit width.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.ssub.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 1)  ; %res = 1
      %res = call i4 @llvm.ssub.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 6)  ; %res = -4
      %res = call i4 @llvm.ssub.sat.i4(i4 -4, i4 5)  ; %res = -8
      %res = call i4 @llvm.ssub.sat.i4(i4 4, i4 -5)  ; %res = 7


.. _int_usub_sat:

'``llvm.usub.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.usub.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.usub.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare i32 @llvm.usub.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare i64 @llvm.usub.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.usub.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.usub.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform unsigned
saturating subtraction on the 2 arguments.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo unsigned subtraction.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The minimum value this operation can clamp to is 0, which is the smallest
unsigned value representable by the bit width of the unsigned arguments.
Because this is an unsigned operation, the result will never saturate towards
the largest possible value representable by this bit width.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.usub.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 1)  ; %res = 1
      %res = call i4 @llvm.usub.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 6)  ; %res = 0


'``llvm.sshl.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sshl.sat``
on integers or vectors of integers of any bit width.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.sshl.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare i32 @llvm.sshl.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare i64 @llvm.sshl.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.sshl.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sshl.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform signed
saturating left shift on the first argument.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) and the result may be of integer types of any
bit width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` is the value to be
shifted, and ``%b`` is the amount to shift by. If ``b`` is (statically or
dynamically) equal to or larger than the integer bit width of the arguments,
the result is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. If the arguments are
vectors, each vector element of ``a`` is shifted by the corresponding shift
amount in ``b``.


Semantics:
""""""""""

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest signed value
representable by the bit width of the arguments. The minimum value is the
smallest signed value representable by this bit width.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.sshl.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 1)  ; %res = 4
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sshl.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 2)  ; %res = 7
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sshl.sat.i4(i4 -5, i4 1)  ; %res = -8
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sshl.sat.i4(i4 -1, i4 1)  ; %res = -2


'``llvm.ushl.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.ushl.sat``
on integers or vectors of integers of any bit width.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.ushl.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b)
      declare i32 @llvm.ushl.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b)
      declare i64 @llvm.ushl.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.ushl.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ushl.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform unsigned
saturating left shift on the first argument.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (``%a`` and ``%b``) and the result may be of integer types of any
bit width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` is the value to be
shifted, and ``%b`` is the amount to shift by. If ``b`` is (statically or
dynamically) equal to or larger than the integer bit width of the arguments,
the result is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. If the arguments are
vectors, each vector element of ``a`` is shifted by the corresponding shift
amount in ``b``.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest unsigned value
representable by the bit width of the arguments.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.ushl.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 1)  ; %res = 4
      %res = call i4 @llvm.ushl.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 3)  ; %res = 15


Fixed Point Arithmetic Intrinsics
---------------------------------

A fixed point number represents a real data type for a number that has a fixed
number of digits after a radix point (equivalent to the decimal point '.').
The number of digits after the radix point is referred as the `scale`. These
are useful for representing fractional values to a specific precision. The
following intrinsics perform fixed point arithmetic operations on 2 operands
of the same scale, specified as the third argument.

The ``llvm.*mul.fix`` family of intrinsic functions represents a multiplication
of fixed point numbers through scaled integers. Therefore, fixed point
multiplication can be represented as

.. code-block:: llvm

        %result = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.i4(i4 %a, i4 %b, i32 %scale)

        ; Expands to
        %a2 = sext i4 %a to i8
        %b2 = sext i4 %b to i8
        %mul = mul nsw nuw i8 %a2, %b2
        %scale2 = trunc i32 %scale to i8
        %r = ashr i8 %mul, i8 %scale2  ; this is for a target rounding down towards negative infinity
        %result = trunc i8 %r to i4

The ``llvm.*div.fix`` family of intrinsic functions represents a division of
fixed point numbers through scaled integers. Fixed point division can be
represented as:

.. code-block:: llvm

        %result call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i4(i4 %a, i4 %b, i32 %scale)

        ; Expands to
        %a2 = sext i4 %a to i8
        %b2 = sext i4 %b to i8
        %scale2 = trunc i32 %scale to i8
        %a3 = shl i8 %a2, %scale2
        %r = sdiv i8 %a3, %b2 ; this is for a target rounding towards zero
        %result = trunc i8 %r to i4

For each of these functions, if the result cannot be represented exactly with
the provided scale, the result is rounded. Rounding is unspecified since
preferred rounding may vary for different targets. Rounding is specified
through a target hook. Different pipelines should legalize or optimize this
using the rounding specified by this hook if it is provided. Operations like
constant folding, instruction combining, KnownBits, and ValueTracking should
also use this hook, if provided, and not assume the direction of rounding. A
rounded result must always be within one unit of precision from the true
result. That is, the error between the returned result and the true result must
be less than 1/2^(scale).


'``llvm.smul.fix.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.smul.fix``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.smul.fix.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.smul.fix.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.smul.fix.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.smul.fix.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.smul.fix``' family of intrinsic functions perform signed
fixed point multiplication on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. The arguments may also work with
int vectors of the same length and int size. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo signed fixed point multiplication. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs fixed point multiplication on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

It is undefined behavior if the result value does not fit within the range of
the fixed point type.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 6 (2 x 3 = 6)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (1.5 x 1 = 1.5)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 -2, i32 1)  ; %res = -3 (1.5 x -1 = -1.5)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded up to -2 or down to -2.5
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 -3, i32 1)  ; %res = -5 (or -4) (1.5 x -1.5 = -2.25)


'``llvm.umul.fix.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.umul.fix``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.umul.fix.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.umul.fix.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.umul.fix.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.umul.fix.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.umul.fix``' family of intrinsic functions perform unsigned
fixed point multiplication on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. The arguments may also work with
int vectors of the same length and int size. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo unsigned fixed point multiplication. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs unsigned fixed point multiplication on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

It is undefined behavior if the result value does not fit within the range of
the fixed point type.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 6 (2 x 3 = 6)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (1.5 x 1 = 1.5)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded down to 3.5 or up to 4
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.i4(i4 15, i4 1, i32 1)  ; %res = 7 (or 8) (7.5 x 0.5 = 3.75)


'``llvm.smul.fix.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.smul.fix.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.smul.fix.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.smul.fix.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform signed
fixed point saturating multiplication on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo signed fixed point multiplication. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs fixed point multiplication on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest signed value
representable by the bit width of the first 2 arguments. The minimum value is the
smallest signed value representable by this bit width.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 6 (2 x 3 = 6)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (1.5 x 1 = 1.5)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 -2, i32 1)  ; %res = -3 (1.5 x -1 = -1.5)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded up to -2 or down to -2.5
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 -3, i32 1)  ; %res = -5 (or -4) (1.5 x -1.5 = -2.25)

      ; Saturation
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 7, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 7
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 7, i4 4, i32 2)  ; %res = 7
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 -8, i4 5, i32 2)  ; %res = -8
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 -8, i4 -2, i32 1)  ; %res = 7

      ; Scale can affect the saturation result
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 4, i32 0)  ; %res = 7 (2 x 4 -> clamped to 7)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.smul.fix.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 4 (1 x 2 = 2)


'``llvm.umul.fix.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.umul.fix.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.umul.fix.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.umul.fix.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform unsigned
fixed point saturating multiplication on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo unsigned fixed point multiplication. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs fixed point multiplication on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest unsigned value
representable by the bit width of the first 2 arguments. The minimum value is the
smallest unsigned value representable by this bit width (zero).


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 6 (2 x 3 = 6)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 2, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (1.5 x 1 = 1.5)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded down to 2 or up to 2.5
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 3, i32 1)  ; %res = 4 (or 5) (1.5 x 1.5 = 2.25)

      ; Saturation
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i4(i4 8, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 15 (8 x 2 -> clamped to 15)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i4(i4 8, i4 8, i32 2)  ; %res = 15 (2 x 2 -> clamped to 3.75)

      ; Scale can affect the saturation result
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 4, i32 0)  ; %res = 7 (2 x 4 -> clamped to 7)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.umul.fix.sat.i4(i4 2, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 4 (1 x 2 = 2)


'``llvm.sdiv.fix.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sdiv.fix``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.sdiv.fix.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sdiv.fix``' family of intrinsic functions perform signed
fixed point division on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. The arguments may also work with
int vectors of the same length and int size. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo signed fixed point division. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs fixed point division on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

It is undefined behavior if the result value does not fit within the range of
the fixed point type, or if the second argument is zero.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i4(i4 6, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 3 (6 / 2 = 3)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i4(i4 6, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (3 / 2 = 1.5)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 -2, i32 1) ; %res = -3 (1.5 / -1 = -1.5)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded up to 1 or down to 0.5
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 2 (or 1) (1.5 / 2 = 0.75)


'``llvm.udiv.fix.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.udiv.fix``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.udiv.fix.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.udiv.fix.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.udiv.fix.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.udiv.fix.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.udiv.fix``' family of intrinsic functions perform unsigned
fixed point division on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. The arguments may also work with
int vectors of the same length and int size. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo unsigned fixed point division. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs fixed point division on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

It is undefined behavior if the result value does not fit within the range of
the fixed point type, or if the second argument is zero.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.i4(i4 6, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 3 (6 / 2 = 3)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.i4(i4 6, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (3 / 2 = 1.5)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.i4(i4 1, i4 -8, i32 4) ; %res = 2 (0.0625 / 0.5 = 0.125)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded up to 1 or down to 0.5
      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.i4(i4 3, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 2 (or 1) (1.5 / 2 = 0.75)


'``llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.sdiv.fix.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.sdiv.fix.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform signed
fixed point saturating division on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo signed fixed point division. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs fixed point division on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest signed value
representable by the bit width of the first 2 arguments. The minimum value is the
smallest signed value representable by this bit width.

It is undefined behavior if the second argument is zero.


Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 6, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 3 (6 / 2 = 3)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 6, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (3 / 2 = 1.5)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 -2, i32 1) ; %res = -3 (1.5 / -1 = -1.5)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded up to 1 or down to 0.5
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 2 (or 1) (1.5 / 2 = 0.75)

      ; Saturation
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 -8, i4 -1, i32 0)  ; %res = 7 (-8 / -1 = 8 => 7)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 4, i4 2, i32 2)  ; %res = 7 (1 / 0.5 = 2 => 1.75)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.sdiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 -4, i4 1, i32 2)  ; %res = -8 (-1 / 0.25 = -4 => -2)


'``llvm.udiv.fix.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.udiv.fix.sat``
on any integer bit width or vectors of integers.

::

      declare i16 @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.i16(i16 %a, i16 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i32 @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.i32(i32 %a, i32 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare i64 @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.i64(i64 %a, i64 %b, i32 %scale)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, i32 %scale)

Overview
"""""""""

The '``llvm.udiv.fix.sat``' family of intrinsic functions perform unsigned
fixed point saturating division on 2 arguments of the same scale.

Arguments
""""""""""

The arguments (%a and %b) and the result may be of integer types of any bit
width, but they must have the same bit width. ``%a`` and ``%b`` are the two
values that will undergo unsigned fixed point division. The argument
``%scale`` represents the scale of both operands, and must be a constant
integer.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This operation performs fixed point division on the 2 arguments of a
specified scale. The result will also be returned in the same scale specified
in the third argument.

If the result value cannot be precisely represented in the given scale, the
value is rounded up or down to the closest representable value. The rounding
direction is unspecified.

The maximum value this operation can clamp to is the largest unsigned value
representable by the bit width of the first 2 arguments. The minimum value is the
smallest unsigned value representable by this bit width (zero).

It is undefined behavior if the second argument is zero.

Examples
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 6, i4 2, i32 0)  ; %res = 3 (6 / 2 = 3)
      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 6, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 3 (3 / 2 = 1.5)

      ; The result in the following could be rounded down to 0.5 or up to 1
      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 3, i4 4, i32 1)  ; %res = 1 (or 2) (1.5 / 2 = 0.75)

      ; Saturation
      %res = call i4 @llvm.udiv.fix.sat.i4(i4 8, i4 2, i32 2)  ; %res = 15 (2 / 0.5 = 4 => 3.75)


Specialized Arithmetic Intrinsics
---------------------------------

.. _i_intr_llvm_canonicalize:

'``llvm.canonicalize.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare float @llvm.canonicalize.f32(float %a)
      declare double @llvm.canonicalize.f64(double %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.canonicalize.*``' intrinsic returns the platform specific canonical
encoding of a floating-point number. This canonicalization is useful for
implementing certain numeric primitives such as frexp. The canonical encoding is
defined by IEEE-754-2008 to be:

::

      2.1.8 canonical encoding: The preferred encoding of a floating-point
      representation in a format. Applied to declets, significands of finite
      numbers, infinities, and NaNs, especially in decimal formats.

This operation can also be considered equivalent to the IEEE-754-2008
conversion of a floating-point value to the same format. NaNs are handled
according to section 6.2.

Examples of non-canonical encodings:

- x87 pseudo denormals, pseudo NaNs, pseudo Infinity, Unnormals. These are
  converted to a canonical representation per hardware-specific protocol.
- Many normal decimal floating-point numbers have non-canonical alternative
  encodings.
- Some machines, like GPUs or ARMv7 NEON, do not support subnormal values.
  These are treated as non-canonical encodings of zero and will be flushed to
  a zero of the same sign by this operation.

Note that per IEEE-754-2008 6.2, systems that support signaling NaNs with
default exception handling must signal an invalid exception, and produce a
quiet NaN result.

This function should always be implementable as multiplication by 1.0, provided
that the compiler does not constant fold the operation. Likewise, division by
1.0 and ``llvm.minnum(x, x)`` are possible implementations. Addition with
-0.0 is also sufficient provided that the rounding mode is not -Infinity.

``@llvm.canonicalize`` must preserve the equality relation. That is:

- ``(@llvm.canonicalize(x) == x)`` is equivalent to ``(x == x)``
- ``(@llvm.canonicalize(x) == @llvm.canonicalize(y))`` is equivalent
  to ``(x == y)``

Additionally, the sign of zero must be conserved:
``@llvm.canonicalize(-0.0) = -0.0`` and ``@llvm.canonicalize(+0.0) = +0.0``

The payload bits of a NaN must be conserved, with two exceptions.
First, environments which use only a single canonical representation of NaN
must perform said canonicalization. Second, SNaNs must be quieted per the
usual methods.

The canonicalization operation may be optimized away if:

- The input is known to be canonical. For example, it was produced by a
  floating-point operation that is required by the standard to be canonical.
- The result is consumed only by (or fused with) other floating-point
  operations. That is, the bits of the floating-point value are not examined.

.. _int_fmuladd:

'``llvm.fmuladd.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare float @llvm.fmuladd.f32(float %a, float %b, float %c)
      declare double @llvm.fmuladd.f64(double %a, double %b, double %c)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.fmuladd.*``' intrinsic functions represent multiply-add
expressions that can be fused if the code generator determines that (a) the
target instruction set has support for a fused operation, and (b) that the
fused operation is more efficient than the equivalent, separate pair of mul
and add instructions.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.fmuladd.*``' intrinsics each take three arguments: two
multiplicands, a and b, and an addend c.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The expression:

::

      %0 = call float @llvm.fmuladd.f32(%a, %b, %c)

is equivalent to the expression a \* b + c, except that it is unspecified
whether rounding will be performed between the multiplication and addition
steps. Fusion is not guaranteed, even if the target platform supports it.
If a fused multiply-add is required, the corresponding
:ref:`llvm.fma <int_fma>` intrinsic function should be used instead.
This never sets errno, just as '``llvm.fma.*``'.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r2 = call float @llvm.fmuladd.f32(float %a, float %b, float %c) ; yields float:r2 = (a * b) + c


Hardware-Loop Intrinsics
------------------------

LLVM support several intrinsics to mark a loop as a hardware-loop. They are
hints to the backend which are required to lower these intrinsics further to target
specific instructions, or revert the hardware-loop to a normal loop if target
specific restriction are not met and a hardware-loop can't be generated.

These intrinsics may be modified in the future and are not intended to be used
outside the backend. Thus, front-end and mid-level optimizations should not be
generating these intrinsics.


'``llvm.set.loop.iterations.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare void @llvm.set.loop.iterations.i32(i32)
      declare void @llvm.set.loop.iterations.i64(i64)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.set.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics are used to specify the
hardware-loop trip count. They are placed in the loop preheader basic block and
are marked as ``IntrNoDuplicate`` to avoid optimizers duplicating these
instructions.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The integer operand is the loop trip count of the hardware-loop, and thus
not e.g. the loop back-edge taken count.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.set.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics do not perform any arithmetic
on their operand. It's a hint to the backend that can use this to set up the
hardware-loop count with a target specific instruction, usually a move of this
value to a special register or a hardware-loop instruction.


'``llvm.start.loop.iterations.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.start.loop.iterations.i32(i32)
      declare i64 @llvm.start.loop.iterations.i64(i64)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.start.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics are similar to the
'``llvm.set.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics, used to specify the
hardware-loop trip count but also produce a value identical to the input
that can be used as the input to the loop. They are placed in the loop
preheader basic block and the output is expected to be the input to the
phi for the induction variable of the loop, decremented by the
'``llvm.loop.decrement.reg.*``'.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The integer operand is the loop trip count of the hardware-loop, and thus
not e.g. the loop back-edge taken count.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.start.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics do not perform any arithmetic
on their operand. It's a hint to the backend that can use this to set up the
hardware-loop count with a target specific instruction, usually a move of this
value to a special register or a hardware-loop instruction.

'``llvm.test.set.loop.iterations.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i1 @llvm.test.set.loop.iterations.i32(i32)
      declare i1 @llvm.test.set.loop.iterations.i64(i64)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.test.set.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics are used to specify the
the loop trip count, and also test that the given count is not zero, allowing
it to control entry to a while-loop.  They are placed in the loop preheader's
predecessor basic block, and are marked as ``IntrNoDuplicate`` to avoid
optimizers duplicating these instructions.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The integer operand is the loop trip count of the hardware-loop, and thus
not e.g. the loop back-edge taken count.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.test.set.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics do not perform any
arithmetic on their operand. It's a hint to the backend that can use this to
set up the hardware-loop count with a target specific instruction, usually a
move of this value to a special register or a hardware-loop instruction.
The result is the conditional value of whether the given count is not zero.


'``llvm.test.start.loop.iterations.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare {i32, i1} @llvm.test.start.loop.iterations.i32(i32)
      declare {i64, i1} @llvm.test.start.loop.iterations.i64(i64)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.test.start.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics are similar to the
'``llvm.test.set.loop.iterations.*``' and '``llvm.start.loop.iterations.*``'
intrinsics, used to specify the hardware-loop trip count, but also produce a
value identical to the input that can be used as the input to the loop. The
second i1 output controls entry to a while-loop.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The integer operand is the loop trip count of the hardware-loop, and thus
not e.g. the loop back-edge taken count.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.test.start.loop.iterations.*``' intrinsics do not perform any
arithmetic on their operand. It's a hint to the backend that can use this to
set up the hardware-loop count with a target specific instruction, usually a
move of this value to a special register or a hardware-loop instruction.
The result is a pair of the input and a conditional value of whether the
given count is not zero.


'``llvm.loop.decrement.reg.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.loop.decrement.reg.i32(i32, i32)
      declare i64 @llvm.loop.decrement.reg.i64(i64, i64)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.loop.decrement.reg.*``' intrinsics are used to lower the loop
iteration counter and return an updated value that will be used in the next
loop test check.

Arguments:
""""""""""

Both arguments must have identical integer types. The first operand is the
loop iteration counter. The second operand is the maximum number of elements
processed in an iteration.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.loop.decrement.reg.*``' intrinsics do an integer ``SUB`` of its
two operands, which is not allowed to wrap. They return the remaining number of
iterations still to be executed, and can be used together with a ``PHI``,
``ICMP`` and ``BR`` to control the number of loop iterations executed. Any
optimizations are allowed to treat it is a ``SUB``, and it is supported by
SCEV, so it's the backends responsibility to handle cases where it may be
optimized. These intrinsics are marked as ``IntrNoDuplicate`` to avoid
optimizers duplicating these instructions.


'``llvm.loop.decrement.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i1 @llvm.loop.decrement.i32(i32)
      declare i1 @llvm.loop.decrement.i64(i64)

Overview:
"""""""""

The HardwareLoops pass allows the loop decrement value to be specified with an
option. It defaults to a loop decrement value of 1, but it can be an unsigned
integer value provided by this option.  The '``llvm.loop.decrement.*``'
intrinsics decrement the loop iteration counter with this value, and return a
false predicate if the loop should exit, and true otherwise.
This is emitted if the loop counter is not updated via a ``PHI`` node, which
can also be controlled with an option.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The integer argument is the loop decrement value used to decrement the loop
iteration counter.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.loop.decrement.*``' intrinsics do a ``SUB`` of the loop iteration
counter with the given loop decrement value, and return false if the loop
should exit, this ``SUB`` is not allowed to wrap. The result is a condition
that is used by the conditional branch controlling the loop.


Vector Reduction Intrinsics
---------------------------

Horizontal reductions of vectors can be expressed using the following
intrinsics. Each one takes a vector operand as an input and applies its
respective operation across all elements of the vector, returning a single
scalar result of the same element type.

.. _int_vector_reduce_add:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.add.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.add.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)
      declare i64 @llvm.vector.reduce.add.v2i64(<2 x i64> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.add.*``' intrinsics do an integer ``ADD``
reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type matches
the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_fadd:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.fadd.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare float @llvm.vector.reduce.fadd.v4f32(float %start_value, <4 x float> %a)
      declare double @llvm.vector.reduce.fadd.v2f64(double %start_value, <2 x double> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.fadd.*``' intrinsics do a floating-point
``ADD`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

If the intrinsic call has the 'reassoc' flag set, then the reduction will not
preserve the associativity of an equivalent scalarized counterpart. Otherwise
the reduction will be *sequential*, thus implying that the operation respects
the associativity of a scalarized reduction. That is, the reduction begins with
the start value and performs an fadd operation with consecutively increasing
vector element indices. See the following pseudocode:

::

    float sequential_fadd(start_value, input_vector)
      result = start_value
      for i = 0 to length(input_vector)
        result = result + input_vector[i]
      return result


Arguments:
""""""""""
The first argument to this intrinsic is a scalar start value for the reduction.
The type of the start value matches the element-type of the vector input.
The second argument must be a vector of floating-point values.

To ignore the start value, negative zero (``-0.0``) can be used, as it is
the neutral value of floating point addition.

Examples:
"""""""""

::

      %unord = call reassoc float @llvm.vector.reduce.fadd.v4f32(float -0.0, <4 x float> %input) ; relaxed reduction
      %ord = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fadd.v4f32(float %start_value, <4 x float> %input) ; sequential reduction


.. _int_vector_reduce_mul:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.mul.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.mul.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)
      declare i64 @llvm.vector.reduce.mul.v2i64(<2 x i64> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.mul.*``' intrinsics do an integer ``MUL``
reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type matches
the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_fmul:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.fmul.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmul.v4f32(float %start_value, <4 x float> %a)
      declare double @llvm.vector.reduce.fmul.v2f64(double %start_value, <2 x double> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.fmul.*``' intrinsics do a floating-point
``MUL`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

If the intrinsic call has the 'reassoc' flag set, then the reduction will not
preserve the associativity of an equivalent scalarized counterpart. Otherwise
the reduction will be *sequential*, thus implying that the operation respects
the associativity of a scalarized reduction. That is, the reduction begins with
the start value and performs an fmul operation with consecutively increasing
vector element indices. See the following pseudocode:

::

    float sequential_fmul(start_value, input_vector)
      result = start_value
      for i = 0 to length(input_vector)
        result = result * input_vector[i]
      return result


Arguments:
""""""""""
The first argument to this intrinsic is a scalar start value for the reduction.
The type of the start value matches the element-type of the vector input.
The second argument must be a vector of floating-point values.

To ignore the start value, one (``1.0``) can be used, as it is the neutral
value of floating point multiplication.

Examples:
"""""""""

::

      %unord = call reassoc float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmul.v4f32(float 1.0, <4 x float> %input) ; relaxed reduction
      %ord = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmul.v4f32(float %start_value, <4 x float> %input) ; sequential reduction

.. _int_vector_reduce_and:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.and.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.and.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.and.*``' intrinsics do a bitwise ``AND``
reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type matches
the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_or:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.or.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.or.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.or.*``' intrinsics do a bitwise ``OR`` reduction
of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type matches the
element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_xor:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.xor.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.xor.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.xor.*``' intrinsics do a bitwise ``XOR``
reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type matches
the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_smax:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.smax.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.smax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.smax.*``' intrinsics do a signed integer
``MAX`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_smin:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.smin.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.smin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.smin.*``' intrinsics do a signed integer
``MIN`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_umax:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.umax.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.umax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.umax.*``' intrinsics do an unsigned
integer ``MAX`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The
return type matches the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_umin:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.umin.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.umin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.umin.*``' intrinsics do an unsigned
integer ``MIN`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The
return type matches the element-type of the vector input.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of integer values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_fmax:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.fmax.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmax.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      declare double @llvm.vector.reduce.fmax.v2f64(<2 x double> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.fmax.*``' intrinsics do a floating-point
``MAX`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the '``llvm.maxnum.*``'
intrinsic. That is, the result will always be a number unless all elements of
the vector are NaN. For a vector with maximum element magnitude 0.0 and
containing both +0.0 and -0.0 elements, the sign of the result is unspecified.

If the intrinsic call has the ``nnan`` fast-math flag, then the operation can
assume that NaNs are not present in the input vector.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of floating-point values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_fmin:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.fmin.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmin.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      declare double @llvm.vector.reduce.fmin.v2f64(<2 x double> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.fmin.*``' intrinsics do a floating-point
``MIN`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the '``llvm.minnum.*``'
intrinsic. That is, the result will always be a number unless all elements of
the vector are NaN. For a vector with minimum element magnitude 0.0 and
containing both +0.0 and -0.0 elements, the sign of the result is unspecified.

If the intrinsic call has the ``nnan`` fast-math flag, then the operation can
assume that NaNs are not present in the input vector.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of floating-point values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_fmaximum:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.fmaximum.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmaximum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      declare double @llvm.vector.reduce.fmaximum.v2f64(<2 x double> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.fmaximum.*``' intrinsics do a floating-point
``MAX`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the '``llvm.maximum.*``'
intrinsic. That is, this intrinsic propagates NaNs and +0.0 is considered
greater than -0.0. If any element of the vector is a NaN, the result is NaN.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of floating-point values.

.. _int_vector_reduce_fminimum:

'``llvm.vector.reduce.fminimum.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vector.reduce.fminimum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      declare double @llvm.vector.reduce.fminimum.v2f64(<2 x double> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reduce.fminimum.*``' intrinsics do a floating-point
``MIN`` reduction of a vector, returning the result as a scalar. The return type
matches the element-type of the vector input.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the '``llvm.minimum.*``'
intrinsic. That is, this intrinsic propagates NaNs and -0.0 is considered less
than +0.0. If any element of the vector is a NaN, the result is NaN.

Arguments:
""""""""""
The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector of floating-point values.

'``llvm.vector.insert``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      ; Insert fixed type into scalable type
      declare <vscale x 4 x float> @llvm.vector.insert.nxv4f32.v4f32(<vscale x 4 x float> %vec, <4 x float> %subvec, i64 <idx>)
      declare <vscale x 2 x double> @llvm.vector.insert.nxv2f64.v2f64(<vscale x 2 x double> %vec, <2 x double> %subvec, i64 <idx>)

      ; Insert scalable type into scalable type
      declare <vscale x 4 x float> @llvm.vector.insert.nxv4f64.nxv2f64(<vscale x 4 x float> %vec, <vscale x 2 x float> %subvec, i64 <idx>)

      ; Insert fixed type into fixed type
      declare <4 x double> @llvm.vector.insert.v4f64.v2f64(<4 x double> %vec, <2 x double> %subvec, i64 <idx>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.insert.*``' intrinsics insert a vector into another vector
starting from a given index. The return type matches the type of the vector we
insert into. Conceptually, this can be used to build a scalable vector out of
non-scalable vectors, however this intrinsic can also be used on purely fixed
types.

Scalable vectors can only be inserted into other scalable vectors.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``vec`` is the vector which ``subvec`` will be inserted into.
The ``subvec`` is the vector that will be inserted.

``idx`` represents the starting element number at which ``subvec`` will be
inserted. ``idx`` must be a constant multiple of ``subvec``'s known minimum
vector length. If ``subvec`` is a scalable vector, ``idx`` is first scaled by
the runtime scaling factor of ``subvec``. The elements of ``vec`` starting at
``idx`` are overwritten with ``subvec``. Elements ``idx`` through (``idx`` +
num_elements(``subvec``) - 1) must be valid ``vec`` indices. If this condition
cannot be determined statically but is false at runtime, then the result vector
is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


'``llvm.vector.extract``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      ; Extract fixed type from scalable type
      declare <4 x float> @llvm.vector.extract.v4f32.nxv4f32(<vscale x 4 x float> %vec, i64 <idx>)
      declare <2 x double> @llvm.vector.extract.v2f64.nxv2f64(<vscale x 2 x double> %vec, i64 <idx>)

      ; Extract scalable type from scalable type
      declare <vscale x 2 x float> @llvm.vector.extract.nxv2f32.nxv4f32(<vscale x 4 x float> %vec, i64 <idx>)

      ; Extract fixed type from fixed type
      declare <2 x double> @llvm.vector.extract.v2f64.v4f64(<4 x double> %vec, i64 <idx>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.extract.*``' intrinsics extract a vector from within another
vector starting from a given index. The return type must be explicitly
specified. Conceptually, this can be used to decompose a scalable vector into
non-scalable parts, however this intrinsic can also be used on purely fixed
types.

Scalable vectors can only be extracted from other scalable vectors.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``vec`` is the vector from which we will extract a subvector.

The ``idx`` specifies the starting element number within ``vec`` from which a
subvector is extracted. ``idx`` must be a constant multiple of the known-minimum
vector length of the result type. If the result type is a scalable vector,
``idx`` is first scaled by the result type's runtime scaling factor. Elements
``idx`` through (``idx`` + num_elements(result_type) - 1) must be valid vector
indices. If this condition cannot be determined statically but is false at
runtime, then the result vector is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. The
``idx`` parameter must be a vector index constant type (for most targets this
will be an integer pointer type).

'``llvm.vector.reverse``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <2 x i8> @llvm.vector.reverse.v2i8(<2 x i8> %a)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.vector.reverse.nxv4i32(<vscale x 4 x i32> %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.reverse.*``' intrinsics reverse a vector.
The intrinsic takes a single vector and returns a vector of matching type but
with the original lane order reversed. These intrinsics work for both fixed
and scalable vectors. While this intrinsic supports all vector types
the recommended way to express this operation for fixed-width vectors is
still to use a shufflevector, as that may allow for more optimization
opportunities.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument to this intrinsic must be a vector.

'``llvm.vector.deinterleave2``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare {<2 x double>, <2 x double>} @llvm.vector.deinterleave2.v4f64(<4 x double> %vec1)
      declare {<vscale x 4 x i32>, <vscale x 4 x i32>}  @llvm.vector.deinterleave2.nxv8i32(<vscale x 8 x i32> %vec1)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.deinterleave2``' intrinsic constructs two
vectors by deinterleaving the even and odd lanes of the input vector.

This intrinsic works for both fixed and scalable vectors. While this intrinsic
supports all vector types the recommended way to express this operation for
fixed-width vectors is still to use a shufflevector, as that may allow for more
optimization opportunities.

For example:

.. code-block:: text

  {<2 x i64>, <2 x i64>} llvm.vector.deinterleave2.v4i64(<4 x i64> <i64 0, i64 1, i64 2, i64 3>); ==> {<2 x i64> <i64 0, i64 2>, <2 x i64> <i64 1, i64 3>}

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a vector whose type corresponds to the logical concatenation of
the two result types.

'``llvm.vector.interleave2``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <4 x double> @llvm.vector.interleave2.v4f64(<2 x double> %vec1, <2 x double> %vec2)
      declare <vscale x 8 x i32> @llvm.vector.interleave2.nxv8i32(<vscale x 4 x i32> %vec1, <vscale x 4 x i32> %vec2)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.interleave2``' intrinsic constructs a vector
by interleaving two input vectors.

This intrinsic works for both fixed and scalable vectors. While this intrinsic
supports all vector types the recommended way to express this operation for
fixed-width vectors is still to use a shufflevector, as that may allow for more
optimization opportunities.

For example:

.. code-block:: text

   <4 x i64> llvm.vector.interleave2.v4i64(<2 x i64> <i64 0, i64 2>, <2 x i64> <i64 1, i64 3>); ==> <4 x i64> <i64 0, i64 1, i64 2, i64 3>

Arguments:
""""""""""
Both arguments must be vectors of the same type whereby their logical
concatenation matches the result type.

'``llvm.experimental.cttz.elts``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ```llvm.experimental.cttz.elts```
on any vector of integer elements, both fixed width and scalable.

::

      declare i8 @llvm.experimental.cttz.elts.i8.v8i1(<8 x i1> <src>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.cttz.elts``' intrinsic counts the number of trailing
zero elements of a vector.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the vector to be counted. This argument must be a vector
with integer element type. The return type must also be an integer type which is
wide enough to hold the maximum number of elements of the source vector. The
behavior of this intrinsic is undefined if the return type is not wide enough
for the number of elements in the input vector.

The second argument is a constant flag that indicates whether the intrinsic
returns a valid result if the first argument is all zero. If the first argument
is all zero and the second argument is true, the result is poison.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.cttz.elts``' intrinsic counts the trailing (least
significant) zero elements in a vector. If ``src == 0`` the result is the
number of elements in the input vector.

'``llvm.vector.splice``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <2 x double> @llvm.vector.splice.v2f64(<2 x double> %vec1, <2 x double> %vec2, i32 %imm)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.vector.splice.nxv4i32(<vscale x 4 x i32> %vec1, <vscale x 4 x i32> %vec2, i32 %imm)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.splice.*``' intrinsics construct a vector by
concatenating elements from the first input vector with elements of the second
input vector, returning a vector of the same type as the input vectors. The
signed immediate, modulo the number of elements in the vector, is the index
into the first vector from which to extract the result value. This means
conceptually that for a positive immediate, a vector is extracted from
``concat(%vec1, %vec2)`` starting at index ``imm``, whereas for a negative
immediate, it extracts ``-imm`` trailing elements from the first vector, and
the remaining elements from ``%vec2``.

These intrinsics work for both fixed and scalable vectors. While this intrinsic
supports all vector types the recommended way to express this operation for
fixed-width vectors is still to use a shufflevector, as that may allow for more
optimization opportunities.

For example:

.. code-block:: text

 llvm.vector.splice(<A,B,C,D>, <E,F,G,H>, 1);  ==> <B, C, D, E> index
 llvm.vector.splice(<A,B,C,D>, <E,F,G,H>, -3); ==> <B, C, D, E> trailing elements


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two operands are vectors with the same type. The start index is imm
modulo the runtime number of elements in the source vector. For a fixed-width
vector <N x eltty>, imm is a signed integer constant in the range
-N <= imm < N. For a scalable vector <vscale x N x eltty>, imm is a signed
integer constant in the range -X <= imm < X where X=vscale_range_min * N.

'``llvm.experimental.stepvector``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.experimental.stepvector``
to generate a vector whose lane values comprise the linear sequence
<0, 1, 2, ...>. It is primarily intended for scalable vectors.

::

      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.stepvector.nxv4i32()
      declare <vscale x 8 x i16> @llvm.experimental.stepvector.nxv8i16()

The '``llvm.experimental.stepvector``' intrinsics are used to create vectors
of integers whose elements contain a linear sequence of values starting from 0
with a step of 1.  This experimental intrinsic can only be used for vectors
with integer elements that are at least 8 bits in size. If the sequence value
exceeds the allowed limit for the element type then the result for that lane is
undefined.

These intrinsics work for both fixed and scalable vectors. While this intrinsic
is marked as experimental, the recommended way to express this operation for
fixed-width vectors is still to generate a constant vector instead.


Arguments:
""""""""""

None.


'``llvm.experimental.get.vector.length``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.experimental.get.vector.length.i32(i32 %cnt, i32 immarg %vf, i1 immarg %scalable)
      declare i32 @llvm.experimental.get.vector.length.i64(i64 %cnt, i32 immarg %vf, i1 immarg %scalable)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.get.vector.length.*``' intrinsics take a number of
elements to process and returns how many of the elements can be processed
with the requested vectorization factor.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is an unsigned value of any scalar integer type and specifies
the total number of elements to be processed. The second argument is an i32
immediate for the vectorization factor. The third argument indicates if the
vectorization factor should be multiplied by vscale.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Returns a positive i32 value (explicit vector length) that is unknown at compile
time and depends on the hardware specification.
If the result value does not fit in the result type, then the result is
a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

This intrinsic is intended to be used by loop vectorization with VP intrinsics
in order to get the number of elements to process on each loop iteration. The
result should be used to decrease the count for the next iteration until the
count reaches zero.

If the count is larger than the number of lanes in the type described by the
last 2 arguments, this intrinsic may return a value less than the number of
lanes implied by the type. The result will be at least as large as the result
will be on any later loop iteration.

This intrinsic will only return 0 if the input count is also 0. A non-zero input
count will produce a non-zero result.

'``llvm.experimental.vector.partial.reduce.add.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vector.partial.reduce.add.v4i32.v4i32.v8i32(<4 x i32> %a, <8 x i32> %b)
      declare <4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vector.partial.reduce.add.v4i32.v4i32.v16i32(<4 x i32> %a, <16 x i32> %b)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vector.partial.reduce.add.nxv4i32.nxv4i32.nxv8i32(<vscale x 4 x i32> %a, <vscale x 8 x i32> %b)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vector.partial.reduce.add.nxv4i32.nxv4i32.nxv16i32(<vscale x 4 x i32> %a, <vscale x 16 x i32> %b)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vector.experimental.partial.reduce.add.*``' intrinsics reduce the
concatenation of the two vector operands down to the number of elements dictated
by the result type. The result type is a vector type that matches the type of the
first operand vector.

Arguments:
""""""""""

Both arguments must be vectors of matching element types. The first argument type must
match the result type, while the second argument type must have a vector length that is a
positive integer multiple of the first vector/result type. The arguments must be either be
both fixed or both scalable vectors.


'``llvm.experimental.vector.histogram.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These intrinsics are overloaded.

These intrinsics represent histogram-like operations; that is, updating values
in memory that may not be contiguous, and where multiple elements within a
single vector may be updating the same value in memory.

The update operation must be specified as part of the intrinsic name. For a
simple histogram like the following the ``add`` operation would be used.

.. code-block:: c

    void simple_histogram(int *restrict buckets, unsigned *indices, int N, int inc) {
      for (int i = 0; i < N; ++i)
        buckets[indices[i]] += inc;
    }

More update operation types may be added in the future.

::

    declare <8 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vector.histogram.add.v8p0.i32(<8 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 %inc, <8 x i1> %mask)
    declare <vscale x 2 x i64> @llvm.experimental.vector.histogram.add.nxv2p0.i64(<vscale x 2 x ptr> %ptrs, i64 %inc, <vscale x 2 x i1> %mask)

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a vector of pointers to the memory locations to be
updated. The second argument is a scalar used to update the value from
memory; it must match the type of value to be updated. The final argument
is a mask value to exclude locations from being modified.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.vector.histogram.*``' intrinsics are used to perform
updates on potentially overlapping values in memory. The intrinsics represent
the follow sequence of operations:

1. Gather load from the ``ptrs`` operand, with element type matching that of
   the ``inc`` operand.
2. Update of the values loaded from memory. In the case of the ``add``
   update operation, this means:

   1. Perform a cross-vector histogram operation on the ``ptrs`` operand.
   2. Multiply the result by the ``inc`` operand.
   3. Add the result to the values loaded from memory
3. Scatter the result of the update operation to the memory locations from
   the ``ptrs`` operand.

The ``mask`` operand will apply to at least the gather and scatter operations.


.. _int_vector_compress:

'``llvm.experimental.vector.compress.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

LLVM provides an intrinsic for compressing data within a vector based on a selection mask.
Semantically, this is similar to :ref:`llvm.masked.compressstore <int_compressstore>` but with weaker assumptions
and without storing the results to memory, i.e., the data remains in the vector.

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. A number of scalar values of integer, floating point or pointer data type are collected
from an input vector and placed adjacently within the result vector. A mask defines which elements to collect from the vector.
The remaining lanes are filled with values from ``passthru``.

:: code-block:: llvm

      declare <8 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vector.compress.v8i32(<8 x i32> <value>, <8 x i1> <mask>, <8 x i32> <passthru>)
      declare <16 x float> @llvm.experimental.vector.compress.v16f32(<16 x float> <value>, <16 x i1> <mask>, <16 x float> undef)

Overview:
"""""""""

Selects elements from input vector ``value`` according to the ``mask``.
All selected elements are written into adjacent lanes in the result vector,
from lower to higher.
The mask holds an entry for each vector lane, and is used to select elements
to be kept.
If a ``passthru`` vector is given, all remaining lanes are filled with the
corresponding lane's value from ``passthru``.
The main difference to :ref:`llvm.masked.compressstore <int_compressstore>` is
that the we do not need to guard against memory access for unselected lanes.
This allows for branchless code and better optimization for all targets that
do not support or have inefficient
instructions of the explicit semantics of
:ref:`llvm.masked.compressstore <int_compressstore>` but still have some form
of compress operations.
The result vector can be written with a similar effect, as all the selected
values are at the lower positions of the vector, but without requiring
branches to avoid writes where the mask is ``false``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first operand is the input vector, from which elements are selected.
The second operand is the mask, a vector of boolean values.
The third operand is the passthru vector, from which elements are filled
into remaining lanes.
The mask and the input vector must have the same number of vector elements.
The input and passthru vectors must have the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.experimental.vector.compress`` intrinsic compresses data within a vector.
It collects elements from possibly non-adjacent lanes of a vector and places
them contiguously in the result vector based on a selection mask, filling the
remaining lanes with values from ``passthru``.
This intrinsic performs the logic of the following C++ example.
All values in ``out`` after the last selected one are undefined if
``passthru`` is undefined.
If all entries in the ``mask`` are 0, the ``out`` vector is ``passthru``.
If any element of the mask is poison, all elements of the result are poison.
Otherwise, if any element of the mask is undef, all elements of the result are undef.
If ``passthru`` is undefined, the number of valid lanes is equal to the number
of ``true`` entries in the mask, i.e., all lanes >= number-of-selected-values
are undefined.

.. code-block:: cpp

    // Consecutively place selected values in a vector.
    using VecT __attribute__((vector_size(N))) = int;
    VecT compress(VecT vec, VecT mask, VecT passthru) {
      VecT out;
      int idx = 0;
      for (int i = 0; i < N / sizeof(int); ++i) {
        out[idx] = vec[i];
        idx += static_cast<bool>(mask[i]);
      }
      for (; idx < N / sizeof(int); ++idx) {
        out[idx] = passthru[idx];
      }
      return out;
    }


Matrix Intrinsics
-----------------

Operations on matrixes requiring shape information (like number of rows/columns
or the memory layout) can be expressed using the matrix intrinsics. These
intrinsics require matrix dimensions to be passed as immediate arguments, and
matrixes are passed and returned as vectors. This means that for a ``R`` x
``C`` matrix, element ``i`` of column ``j`` is at index ``j * R + i`` in the
corresponding vector, with indices starting at 0. Currently column-major layout
is assumed.  The intrinsics support both integer and floating point matrixes.


'``llvm.matrix.transpose.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare vectorty @llvm.matrix.transpose.*(vectorty %In, i32 <Rows>, i32 <Cols>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.matrix.transpose.*``' intrinsics treat ``%In`` as a ``<Rows> x
<Cols>`` matrix and return the transposed matrix in the result vector.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument ``%In`` is a vector that corresponds to a ``<Rows> x
<Cols>`` matrix. Thus, arguments ``<Rows>`` and ``<Cols>`` correspond to the
number of rows and columns, respectively, and must be positive, constant
integers. The returned vector must have ``<Rows> * <Cols>`` elements, and have
the same float or integer element type as ``%In``.

'``llvm.matrix.multiply.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare vectorty @llvm.matrix.multiply.*(vectorty %A, vectorty %B, i32 <OuterRows>, i32 <Inner>, i32 <OuterColumns>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.matrix.multiply.*``' intrinsics treat ``%A`` as a ``<OuterRows> x
<Inner>`` matrix, ``%B`` as a ``<Inner> x <OuterColumns>`` matrix, and
multiplies them. The result matrix is returned in the result vector.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first vector argument ``%A`` corresponds to a matrix with ``<OuterRows> *
<Inner>`` elements, and the second argument ``%B`` to a matrix with
``<Inner> * <OuterColumns>`` elements. Arguments ``<OuterRows>``,
``<Inner>`` and ``<OuterColumns>`` must be positive, constant integers. The
returned vector must have ``<OuterRows> * <OuterColumns>`` elements.
Vectors ``%A``, ``%B``, and the returned vector all have the same float or
integer element type.


'``llvm.matrix.column.major.load.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare vectorty @llvm.matrix.column.major.load.*(
          ptrty %Ptr, i64 %Stride, i1 <IsVolatile>, i32 <Rows>, i32 <Cols>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.matrix.column.major.load.*``' intrinsics load a ``<Rows> x <Cols>``
matrix using a stride of ``%Stride`` to compute the start address of the
different columns.  The offset is computed using ``%Stride``'s bitwidth. This
allows for convenient loading of sub matrixes. If ``<IsVolatile>`` is true, the
intrinsic is considered a :ref:`volatile memory access <volatile>`. The result
matrix is returned in the result vector. If the ``%Ptr`` argument is known to
be aligned to some boundary, this can be specified as an attribute on the
argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument ``%Ptr`` is a pointer type to the returned vector type, and
corresponds to the start address to load from. The second argument ``%Stride``
is a positive, constant integer with ``%Stride >= <Rows>``. ``%Stride`` is used
to compute the column memory addresses. I.e., for a column ``C``, its start
memory addresses is calculated with ``%Ptr + C * %Stride``. The third Argument
``<IsVolatile>`` is a boolean value.  The fourth and fifth arguments,
``<Rows>`` and ``<Cols>``, correspond to the number of rows and columns,
respectively, and must be positive, constant integers. The returned vector must
have ``<Rows> * <Cols>`` elements.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the
``%Ptr`` arguments.


'``llvm.matrix.column.major.store.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.matrix.column.major.store.*(
          vectorty %In, ptrty %Ptr, i64 %Stride, i1 <IsVolatile>, i32 <Rows>, i32 <Cols>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.matrix.column.major.store.*``' intrinsics store the ``<Rows> x
<Cols>`` matrix in ``%In`` to memory using a stride of ``%Stride`` between
columns. The offset is computed using ``%Stride``'s bitwidth. If
``<IsVolatile>`` is true, the intrinsic is considered a
:ref:`volatile memory access <volatile>`.

If the ``%Ptr`` argument is known to be aligned to some boundary, this can be
specified as an attribute on the argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument ``%In`` is a vector that corresponds to a ``<Rows> x
<Cols>`` matrix to be stored to memory. The second argument ``%Ptr`` is a
pointer to the vector type of ``%In``, and is the start address of the matrix
in memory. The third argument ``%Stride`` is a positive, constant integer with
``%Stride >= <Rows>``.  ``%Stride`` is used to compute the column memory
addresses. I.e., for a column ``C``, its start memory addresses is calculated
with ``%Ptr + C * %Stride``.  The fourth argument ``<IsVolatile>`` is a boolean
value. The arguments ``<Rows>`` and ``<Cols>`` correspond to the number of rows
and columns, respectively, and must be positive, constant integers.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided
for the ``%Ptr`` arguments.


Half Precision Floating-Point Intrinsics
----------------------------------------

For most target platforms, half precision floating-point is a
storage-only format. This means that it is a dense encoding (in memory)
but does not support computation in the format.

This means that code must first load the half-precision floating-point
value as an i16, then convert it to float with
:ref:`llvm.convert.from.fp16 <int_convert_from_fp16>`. Computation can
then be performed on the float value (including extending to double
etc). To store the value back to memory, it is first converted to float
if needed, then converted to i16 with
:ref:`llvm.convert.to.fp16 <int_convert_to_fp16>`, then storing as an
i16 value.

.. _int_convert_to_fp16:

'``llvm.convert.to.fp16``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i16 @llvm.convert.to.fp16.f32(float %a)
      declare i16 @llvm.convert.to.fp16.f64(double %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.convert.to.fp16``' intrinsic function performs a conversion from a
conventional floating-point type to half precision floating-point format.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The intrinsic function contains single argument - the value to be
converted.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.convert.to.fp16``' intrinsic function performs a conversion from a
conventional floating-point format to half precision floating-point format. The
return value is an ``i16`` which contains the converted number.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %res = call i16 @llvm.convert.to.fp16.f32(float %a)
      store i16 %res, i16* @x, align 2

.. _int_convert_from_fp16:

'``llvm.convert.from.fp16``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare float @llvm.convert.from.fp16.f32(i16 %a)
      declare double @llvm.convert.from.fp16.f64(i16 %a)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.convert.from.fp16``' intrinsic function performs a
conversion from half precision floating-point format to single precision
floating-point format.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The intrinsic function contains single argument - the value to be
converted.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.convert.from.fp16``' intrinsic function performs a
conversion from half single precision floating-point format to single
precision floating-point format. The input half-float value is
represented by an ``i16`` value.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %a = load i16, ptr @x, align 2
      %res = call float @llvm.convert.from.fp16(i16 %a)

Saturating floating-point to integer conversions
------------------------------------------------

The ``fptoui`` and ``fptosi`` instructions return a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if the rounded-towards-zero value is not
representable by the result type. These intrinsics provide an alternative
conversion, which will saturate towards the smallest and largest representable
integer values instead.

'``llvm.fptoui.sat.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.fptoui.sat`` on any
floating-point argument type and any integer result type, or vectors thereof.
Not all targets may support all types, however.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.fptoui.sat.i32.f32(float %f)
      declare i19 @llvm.fptoui.sat.i19.f64(double %f)
      declare <4 x i100> @llvm.fptoui.sat.v4i100.v4f128(<4 x fp128> %f)

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic converts the argument into an unsigned integer using saturating
semantics.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument may be any floating-point or vector of floating-point type. The
return value may be any integer or vector of integer type. The number of vector
elements in argument and return must be the same.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The conversion to integer is performed subject to the following rules:

- If the argument is any NaN, zero is returned.
- If the argument is smaller than zero (this includes negative infinity),
  zero is returned.
- If the argument is larger than the largest representable unsigned integer of
  the result type (this includes positive infinity), the largest representable
  unsigned integer is returned.
- Otherwise, the result of rounding the argument towards zero is returned.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      %a = call i8 @llvm.fptoui.sat.i8.f32(float 123.9)              ; yields i8: 123
      %b = call i8 @llvm.fptoui.sat.i8.f32(float -5.7)               ; yields i8:   0
      %c = call i8 @llvm.fptoui.sat.i8.f32(float 377.0)              ; yields i8: 255
      %d = call i8 @llvm.fptoui.sat.i8.f32(float 0xFFF8000000000000) ; yields i8:   0

'``llvm.fptosi.sat.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.fptosi.sat`` on any
floating-point argument type and any integer result type, or vectors thereof.
Not all targets may support all types, however.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.fptosi.sat.i32.f32(float %f)
      declare i19 @llvm.fptosi.sat.i19.f64(double %f)
      declare <4 x i100> @llvm.fptosi.sat.v4i100.v4f128(<4 x fp128> %f)

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic converts the argument into a signed integer using saturating
semantics.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument may be any floating-point or vector of floating-point type. The
return value may be any integer or vector of integer type. The number of vector
elements in argument and return must be the same.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The conversion to integer is performed subject to the following rules:

- If the argument is any NaN, zero is returned.
- If the argument is smaller than the smallest representable signed integer of
  the result type (this includes negative infinity), the smallest
  representable signed integer is returned.
- If the argument is larger than the largest representable signed integer of
  the result type (this includes positive infinity), the largest representable
  signed integer is returned.
- Otherwise, the result of rounding the argument towards zero is returned.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: text

      %a = call i8 @llvm.fptosi.sat.i8.f32(float 23.9)               ; yields i8:   23
      %b = call i8 @llvm.fptosi.sat.i8.f32(float -130.8)             ; yields i8: -128
      %c = call i8 @llvm.fptosi.sat.i8.f32(float 999.0)              ; yields i8:  127
      %d = call i8 @llvm.fptosi.sat.i8.f32(float 0xFFF8000000000000) ; yields i8:    0

Convergence Intrinsics
----------------------

The LLVM convergence intrinsics for controlling the semantics of ``convergent``
operations, which all start with the ``llvm.experimental.convergence.``
prefix, are described in the :doc:`ConvergentOperations` document.

.. _dbg_intrinsics:

Debugger Intrinsics
-------------------

The LLVM debugger intrinsics (which all start with ``llvm.dbg.``
prefix), are described in the `LLVM Source Level
Debugging <SourceLevelDebugging.html#format-common-intrinsics>`_
document.

Exception Handling Intrinsics
-----------------------------

The LLVM exception handling intrinsics (which all start with
``llvm.eh.`` prefix), are described in the `LLVM Exception
Handling <ExceptionHandling.html#format-common-intrinsics>`_ document.

Pointer Authentication Intrinsics
---------------------------------

The LLVM pointer authentication intrinsics (which all start with
``llvm.ptrauth.`` prefix), are described in the `Pointer Authentication
<PointerAuth.html#intrinsics>`_ document.

.. _int_trampoline:

Trampoline Intrinsics
---------------------

These intrinsics make it possible to excise one parameter, marked with
the :ref:`nest <nest>` attribute, from a function. The result is a
callable function pointer lacking the nest parameter - the caller does
not need to provide a value for it. Instead, the value to use is stored
in advance in a "trampoline", a block of memory usually allocated on the
stack, which also contains code to splice the nest value into the
argument list. This is used to implement the GCC nested function address
extension.

For example, if the function is ``i32 f(ptr nest %c, i32 %x, i32 %y)``
then the resulting function pointer has signature ``i32 (i32, i32)``.
It can be created as follows:

.. code-block:: llvm

      %tramp = alloca [10 x i8], align 4 ; size and alignment only correct for X86
      call ptr @llvm.init.trampoline(ptr %tramp, ptr @f, ptr %nval)
      %fp = call ptr @llvm.adjust.trampoline(ptr %tramp)

The call ``%val = call i32 %fp(i32 %x, i32 %y)`` is then equivalent to
``%val = call i32 %f(ptr %nval, i32 %x, i32 %y)``.

.. _int_it:

'``llvm.init.trampoline``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.init.trampoline(ptr <tramp>, ptr <func>, ptr <nval>)

Overview:
"""""""""

This fills the memory pointed to by ``tramp`` with executable code,
turning it into a trampoline.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.init.trampoline`` intrinsic takes three arguments, all
pointers. The ``tramp`` argument must point to a sufficiently large and
sufficiently aligned block of memory; this memory is written to by the
intrinsic. Note that the size and the alignment are target-specific -
LLVM currently provides no portable way of determining them, so a
front-end that generates this intrinsic needs to have some
target-specific knowledge. The ``func`` argument must hold a function.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The block of memory pointed to by ``tramp`` is filled with target
dependent code, turning it into a function. Then ``tramp`` needs to be
passed to :ref:`llvm.adjust.trampoline <int_at>` to get a pointer which can
be :ref:`bitcast (to a new function) and called <int_trampoline>`. The new
function's signature is the same as that of ``func`` with any arguments
marked with the ``nest`` attribute removed. At most one such ``nest``
argument is allowed, and it must be of pointer type. Calling the new
function is equivalent to calling ``func`` with the same argument list,
but with ``nval`` used for the missing ``nest`` argument. If, after
calling ``llvm.init.trampoline``, the memory pointed to by ``tramp`` is
modified, then the effect of any later call to the returned function
pointer is undefined.

.. _int_at:

'``llvm.adjust.trampoline``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.adjust.trampoline(ptr <tramp>)

Overview:
"""""""""

This performs any required machine-specific adjustment to the address of
a trampoline (passed as ``tramp``).

Arguments:
""""""""""

``tramp`` must point to a block of memory which already has trampoline
code filled in by a previous call to
:ref:`llvm.init.trampoline <int_it>`.

Semantics:
""""""""""

On some architectures the address of the code to be executed needs to be
different than the address where the trampoline is actually stored. This
intrinsic returns the executable address corresponding to ``tramp``
after performing the required machine specific adjustments. The pointer
returned can then be :ref:`bitcast and executed <int_trampoline>`.


.. _int_vp:

Vector Predication Intrinsics
-----------------------------
VP intrinsics are intended for predicated SIMD/vector code.  A typical VP
operation takes a vector mask and an explicit vector length parameter as in:

::

      <W x T> llvm.vp.<opcode>.*(<W x T> %x, <W x T> %y, <W x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

The vector mask parameter (%mask) always has a vector of `i1` type, for example
`<32 x i1>`.  The explicit vector length parameter always has the type `i32` and
is an unsigned integer value.  The explicit vector length parameter (%evl) is in
the range:

::

      0 <= %evl <= W,  where W is the number of vector elements

Note that for :ref:`scalable vector types <t_vector>` ``W`` is the runtime
length of the vector.

The VP intrinsic has undefined behavior if ``%evl > W``.  The explicit vector
length (%evl) creates a mask, %EVLmask, with all elements ``0 <= i < %evl`` set
to True, and all other lanes ``%evl <= i < W`` to False.  A new mask %M is
calculated with an element-wise AND from %mask and %EVLmask:

::

      M = %mask AND %EVLmask

A vector operation ``<opcode>`` on vectors ``A`` and ``B`` calculates:

::

       A <opcode> B =  {  A[i] <opcode> B[i]   M[i] = True, and
                       {  undef otherwise

Optimization Hint
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some targets, such as AVX512, do not support the %evl parameter in hardware.
The use of an effective %evl is discouraged for those targets.  The function
``TargetTransformInfo::hasActiveVectorLength()`` returns true when the target
has native support for %evl.

.. _int_vp_select:

'``llvm.vp.select.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.select.v16i32 (<16 x i1> <condition>, <16 x i32> <on_true>, <16 x i32> <on_false>, i32 <evl>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i64>  @llvm.vp.select.nxv4i64 (<vscale x 4 x i1> <condition>, <vscale x 4 x i64> <on_true>, <vscale x 4 x i64> <on_false>, i32 <evl>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.select``' intrinsic is used to choose one value based on a
condition vector, without IR-level branching.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a vector of ``i1`` and indicates the condition.  The
second argument is the value that is selected where the condition vector is
true.  The third argument is the value that is selected where the condition
vector is false.  The vectors must be of the same size.  The fourth argument is
the explicit vector length.

#. The optional ``fast-math flags`` marker indicates that the select has one or
   more :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`. These are optimization hints to
   enable otherwise unsafe floating-point optimizations. Fast-math flags are
   only valid for selects that return a floating-point scalar or vector type,
   or an array (nested to any depth) of floating-point scalar or vector types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The intrinsic selects lanes from the second and third argument depending on a
condition vector.

All result lanes at positions greater or equal than ``%evl`` are undefined.
For all lanes below ``%evl`` where the condition vector is true the lane is
taken from the second argument.  Otherwise, the lane is taken from the third
argument.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.select.v4i32(<4 x i1> %cond, <4 x i32> %on_true, <4 x i32> %on_false, i32 %evl)

      ;;; Expansion.
      ;; Any result is legal on lanes at and above %evl.
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %cond, <4 x i32> %on_true, <4 x i32> %on_false


.. _int_vp_merge:

'``llvm.vp.merge.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.merge.v16i32 (<16 x i1> <condition>, <16 x i32> <on_true>, <16 x i32> <on_false>, i32 <pivot>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i64>  @llvm.vp.merge.nxv4i64 (<vscale x 4 x i1> <condition>, <vscale x 4 x i64> <on_true>, <vscale x 4 x i64> <on_false>, i32 <pivot>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.merge``' intrinsic is used to choose one value based on a
condition vector and an index argument, without IR-level branching.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a vector of ``i1`` and indicates the condition.  The
second argument is the value that is merged where the condition vector is true.
The third argument is the value that is selected where the condition vector is
false or the lane position is greater equal than the pivot. The fourth argument
is the pivot.

#. The optional ``fast-math flags`` marker indicates that the merge has one or
   more :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`. These are optimization hints to
   enable otherwise unsafe floating-point optimizations. Fast-math flags are
   only valid for merges that return a floating-point scalar or vector type,
   or an array (nested to any depth) of floating-point scalar or vector types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The intrinsic selects lanes from the second and third argument depending on a
condition vector and pivot value.

For all lanes where the condition vector is true and the lane position is less
than ``%pivot`` the lane is taken from the second argument.  Otherwise, the lane
is taken from the third argument.

Example:
""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.merge.v4i32(<4 x i1> %cond, <4 x i32> %on_true, <4 x i32> %on_false, i32 %pivot)

      ;;; Expansion.
      ;; Lanes at and above %pivot are taken from %on_false
      %atfirst = insertelement <4 x i32> undef, i32 %pivot, i32 0
      %splat = shufflevector <4 x i32> %atfirst, <4 x i32> poison, <4 x i32> zeroinitializer
      %pivotmask = icmp ult <4 x i32> <i32 0, i32 1, i32 2, i32 3>, <4 x i32> %splat
      %mergemask = and <4 x i1> %cond, <4 x i1> %pivotmask
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mergemask, <4 x i32> %on_true, <4 x i32> %on_false



.. _int_vp_add:

'``llvm.vp.add.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.add.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.add.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.add.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer addition of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.add``' intrinsic performs integer addition (:ref:`add <i_add>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.add.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = add <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison

.. _int_vp_sub:

'``llvm.vp.sub.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sub.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sub.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.sub.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer subtraction of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sub``' intrinsic performs integer subtraction
(:ref:`sub <i_sub>`)  of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled
lane. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.sub.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = sub <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison



.. _int_vp_mul:

'``llvm.vp.mul.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.mul.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.mul.nxv46i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.mul.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer multiplication of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""
The '``llvm.vp.mul``' intrinsic performs integer multiplication
(:ref:`mul <i_mul>`) of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled
lane. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.mul.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = mul <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_sdiv:

'``llvm.vp.sdiv.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sdiv.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sdiv.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.sdiv.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated, signed division of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sdiv``' intrinsic performs signed division (:ref:`sdiv <i_sdiv>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.sdiv.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = sdiv <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_udiv:

'``llvm.vp.udiv.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.udiv.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.udiv.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.udiv.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated, unsigned division of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.udiv``' intrinsic performs unsigned division
(:ref:`udiv <i_udiv>`) of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled
lane. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.udiv.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = udiv <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison



.. _int_vp_srem:

'``llvm.vp.srem.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.srem.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.srem.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.srem.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated computations of the signed remainder of two integer vectors.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.srem``' intrinsic computes the remainder of the signed division
(:ref:`srem <i_srem>`) of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled
lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.srem.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = srem <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison



.. _int_vp_urem:

'``llvm.vp.urem.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.urem.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.urem.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.urem.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated computation of the unsigned remainder of two integer vectors.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.urem``' intrinsic computes the remainder of the unsigned division
(:ref:`urem <i_urem>`) of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled
lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.urem.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = urem <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_ashr:

'``llvm.vp.ashr.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ashr.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ashr.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.ashr.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Vector-predicated arithmetic right-shift.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ashr``' intrinsic computes the arithmetic right shift
(:ref:`ashr <i_ashr>`) of the first argument by the second argument on each
enabled lane. The result on disabled lanes is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.ashr.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = ashr <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_lshr:


'``llvm.vp.lshr.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.lshr.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.lshr.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.lshr.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Vector-predicated logical right-shift.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.lshr``' intrinsic computes the logical right shift
(:ref:`lshr <i_lshr>`) of the first argument by the second argument on each
enabled lane. The result on disabled lanes is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.lshr.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = lshr <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_shl:

'``llvm.vp.shl.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.shl.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.shl.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.shl.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Vector-predicated left shift.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.shl``' intrinsic computes the left shift (:ref:`shl <i_shl>`) of
the first argument by the second argument on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.shl.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = shl <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_or:

'``llvm.vp.or.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.or.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.or.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.or.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Vector-predicated or.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.or``' intrinsic performs a bitwise or (:ref:`or <i_or>`) of the
first two arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is
a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.or.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = or <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_and:

'``llvm.vp.and.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.and.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.and.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.and.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Vector-predicated and.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.and``' intrinsic performs a bitwise and (:ref:`and <i_or>`) of
the first two arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is
a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.and.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = and <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_xor:

'``llvm.vp.xor.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.xor.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.xor.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.xor.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Vector-predicated, bitwise xor.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.xor``' intrinsic performs a bitwise xor (:ref:`xor <i_xor>`) of
the first two arguments on each enabled lane.
The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.xor.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = xor <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison

.. _int_vp_abs:

'``llvm.vp.abs.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.abs.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_int_min_poison>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.abs.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_int_min_poison>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.abs.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_int_min_poison>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated abs of a vector of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation. The fourth argument must be a constant and is a flag to indicate
whether the result value of the '``llvm.vp.abs``' intrinsic is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>` if the first argument is statically or
dynamically an ``INT_MIN`` value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.abs``' intrinsic performs abs (:ref:`abs <int_abs>`) of the first argument on each
enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.abs.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl, i1 false)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.abs.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, i1 false)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison



.. _int_vp_smax:

'``llvm.vp.smax.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.smax.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.smax.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.smax.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer signed maximum of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.smax``' intrinsic performs integer signed maximum (:ref:`smax <int_smax>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.smax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.smax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_smin:

'``llvm.vp.smin.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.smin.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.smin.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.smin.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer signed minimum of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.smin``' intrinsic performs integer signed minimum (:ref:`smin <int_smin>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.smin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.smin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_umax:

'``llvm.vp.umax.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.umax.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.umax.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.umax.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer unsigned maximum of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.umax``' intrinsic performs integer unsigned maximum (:ref:`umax <int_umax>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.umax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.umax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_umin:

'``llvm.vp.umin.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.umin.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.umin.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.umin.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer unsigned minimum of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.umin``' intrinsic performs integer unsigned minimum (:ref:`umin <int_umin>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.umin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.umin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_copysign:

'``llvm.vp.copysign.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.copysign.v16f32 (<16 x float> <mag_op>, <16 x float> <sign_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.copysign.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <mag_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <sign_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.copysign.v256f64 (<256 x double> <mag_op>, <256 x double> <sign_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point copysign of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.copysign``' intrinsic performs floating-point copysign (:ref:`copysign <int_copysign>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.copysign.v4f32(<4 x float> %mag, <4 x float> %sign, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.copysign.v4f32(<4 x float> %mag, <4 x float> %sign)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_minnum:

'``llvm.vp.minnum.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.minnum.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.minnum.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.minnum.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point IEEE-754 minNum of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.minnum``' intrinsic performs floating-point minimum (:ref:`minnum <i_minnum>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.minnum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.minnum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_maxnum:

'``llvm.vp.maxnum.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.maxnum.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.maxnum.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.maxnum.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point IEEE-754 maxNum of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.maxnum``' intrinsic performs floating-point maximum (:ref:`maxnum <i_maxnum>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.maxnum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.maxnum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_minimum:

'``llvm.vp.minimum.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.minimum.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.minimum.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.minimum.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point minimum of two vectors of floating-point values,
propagating NaNs and treating -0.0 as less than +0.0.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.minimum``' intrinsic performs floating-point minimum (:ref:`minimum <i_minimum>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane, the result being 
NaN if either argument is a NaN. -0.0 is considered to be less than +0.0 for this
intrinsic. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. 
The operation is performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.minimum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.minimum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_maximum:

'``llvm.vp.maximum.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.maximum.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.maximum.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.maximum.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point maximum of two vectors of floating-point values,
propagating NaNs and treating -0.0 as less than +0.0.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.maximum``' intrinsic performs floating-point maximum (:ref:`maximum <i_maximum>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane, the result being
NaN if either argument is a NaN. -0.0 is considered to be less than +0.0 for this
intrinsic. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.
The operation is performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.maximum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.maximum.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fadd:

'``llvm.vp.fadd.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fadd.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fadd.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fadd.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point addition of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fadd``' intrinsic performs floating-point addition (:ref:`fadd <i_fadd>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fadd.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fadd <4 x float> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fsub:

'``llvm.vp.fsub.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fsub.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fsub.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fsub.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point subtraction of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fsub``' intrinsic performs floating-point subtraction (:ref:`fsub <i_fsub>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fsub.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fsub <4 x float> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fmul:

'``llvm.vp.fmul.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fmul.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fmul.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fmul.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point multiplication of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fmul``' intrinsic performs floating-point multiplication (:ref:`fmul <i_fmul>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fmul.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fmul <4 x float> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fdiv:

'``llvm.vp.fdiv.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fdiv.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fdiv.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fdiv.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point division of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fdiv``' intrinsic performs floating-point division (:ref:`fdiv <i_fdiv>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fdiv.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fdiv <4 x float> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_frem:

'``llvm.vp.frem.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.frem.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.frem.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.frem.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point remainder of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.frem``' intrinsic performs floating-point remainder (:ref:`frem <i_frem>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.frem.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = frem <4 x float> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fneg:

'``llvm.vp.fneg.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fneg.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fneg.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fneg.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point negation of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fneg``' intrinsic performs floating-point negation (:ref:`fneg <i_fneg>`)
of the first vector argument on each enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes
is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fneg.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fneg <4 x float> %a
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fabs:

'``llvm.vp.fabs.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fabs.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fabs.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fabs.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point absolute value of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fabs``' intrinsic performs floating-point absolute value
(:ref:`fabs <int_fabs>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled lane.  The
result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fabs.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.fabs.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_sqrt:

'``llvm.vp.sqrt.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.sqrt.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.sqrt.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.sqrt.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point square root of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sqrt``' intrinsic performs floating-point square root (:ref:`sqrt <int_sqrt>`) of
the first vector argument on each enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is
a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`. The operation is performed in the default
floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.sqrt.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.sqrt.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fma:

'``llvm.vp.fma.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fma.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <middle_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fma.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <middle_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fma.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <middle_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point fused multiply-add of two vectors of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point type. The
fourth argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fifth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fma``' intrinsic performs floating-point fused multiply-add (:ref:`llvm.fma <int_fma>`)
of the first, second, and third vector argument on each enabled lane.  The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fma.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x float> %c, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.fma(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x float> %c)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fmuladd:

'``llvm.vp.fmuladd.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fmuladd.v16f32 (<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <middle_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.fmuladd.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <middle_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.fmuladd.v256f64 (<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <middle_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point multiply-add of two vectors of floating-point values
that can be fused if code generator determines that (a) the target instruction
set has support for a fused operation, and (b) that the fused operation is more
efficient than the equivalent, separate pair of mul and add instructions.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments and the result have the same vector of floating-point
type. The fourth argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements
as the result vector type. The fifth argument is the explicit vector length of
the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fmuladd``' intrinsic performs floating-point multiply-add (:ref:`llvm.fuladd <int_fmuladd>`)
of the first, second, and third vector argument on each enabled lane.  The result
on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.  The operation is
performed in the default floating-point environment.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fmuladd.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x float> %c, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.fmuladd(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, <4 x float> %c)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_reduce_add:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.add.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.add.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.add.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer ``ADD`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting value,
returning the result as a scalar.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.add``' intrinsic performs the integer ``ADD`` reduction
(:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.add <int_vector_reduce_add>`) of the vector argument
``val`` on each enabled lane, adding it to the scalar ``start_value``. Disabled
lanes are treated as containing the neutral value ``0`` (i.e. having no effect
on the reduction operation). If the vector length is zero, the result is equal
to ``start_value``.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.add.v4i32(i32 %start, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> zeroinitializer
      %reduction = call i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.add.v4i32(<4 x i32> %masked.a)
      %also.r = add i32 %reduction, %start


.. _int_vp_reduce_fadd:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.fadd.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vp.reduce.fadd.v4f32(float <start_value>, <4 x float> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare double @llvm.vp.reduce.fadd.nxv8f64(double <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x double> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point ``ADD`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
floating-point type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector
on which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of floating-point
values whose element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the
vector mask and is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements
as the vector argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.fadd``' intrinsic performs the floating-point ``ADD``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fadd <int_vector_reduce_fadd>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, adding it to the scalar
``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral value
``-0.0`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If no lanes are
enabled, the resulting value will be equal to ``start_value``.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

See the unpredicated version (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fadd
<int_vector_reduce_fadd>`) for more detail on the semantics of the reduction.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call float @llvm.vp.reduce.fadd.v4f32(float %start, <4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %a, <4 x float> <float -0.0, float -0.0, float -0.0, float -0.0>
      %also.r = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fadd.v4f32(float %start, <4 x float> %masked.a)


.. _int_vp_reduce_mul:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.mul.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.mul.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.mul.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer ``MUL`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting value,
returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.mul``' intrinsic performs the integer ``MUL`` reduction
(:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.mul <int_vector_reduce_mul>`) of the vector argument ``val``
on each enabled lane, multiplying it by the scalar ``start_value``. Disabled
lanes are treated as containing the neutral value ``1`` (i.e. having no effect
on the reduction operation). If the vector length is zero, the result is the
start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.mul.v4i32(i32 %start, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> <i32 1, i32 1, i32 1, i32 1>
      %reduction = call i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.mul.v4i32(<4 x i32> %masked.a)
      %also.r = mul i32 %reduction, %start

.. _int_vp_reduce_fmul:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.fmul.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmul.v4f32(float <start_value>, <4 x float> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare double @llvm.vp.reduce.fmul.nxv8f64(double <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x double> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point ``MUL`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
floating-point type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector
on which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of floating-point
values whose element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the
vector mask and is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements
as the vector argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.fmul``' intrinsic performs the floating-point ``MUL``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmul <int_vector_reduce_fmul>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, multiplying it by the scalar
`start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral value
``1.0`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If no lanes are
enabled, the resulting value will be equal to the starting value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

See the unpredicated version (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmul
<int_vector_reduce_fmul>`) for more detail on the semantics.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmul.v4f32(float %start, <4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %a, <4 x float> <float 1.0, float 1.0, float 1.0, float 1.0>
      %also.r = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmul.v4f32(float %start, <4 x float> %masked.a)


.. _int_vp_reduce_and:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.and.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.and.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.and.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer ``AND`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting value,
returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.and``' intrinsic performs the integer ``AND`` reduction
(:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.and <int_vector_reduce_and>`) of the vector argument
``val`` on each enabled lane, performing an '``and``' of that with with the
scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral
value ``UINT_MAX``, or ``-1`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction
operation). If the vector length is zero, the result is the start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.and.v4i32(i32 %start, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> <i32 -1, i32 -1, i32 -1, i32 -1>
      %reduction = call i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.and.v4i32(<4 x i32> %masked.a)
      %also.r = and i32 %reduction, %start


.. _int_vp_reduce_or:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.or.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.or.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.or.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer ``OR`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting value,
returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.or``' intrinsic performs the integer ``OR`` reduction
(:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.or <int_vector_reduce_or>`) of the vector argument
``val`` on each enabled lane, performing an '``or``' of that with the scalar
``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral value
``0`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If the vector length
is zero, the result is the start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.or.v4i32(i32 %start, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> <i32 0, i32 0, i32 0, i32 0>
      %reduction = call i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.or.v4i32(<4 x i32> %masked.a)
      %also.r = or i32 %reduction, %start

.. _int_vp_reduce_xor:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.xor.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.xor.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.xor.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated integer ``XOR`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting value,
returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.xor``' intrinsic performs the integer ``XOR`` reduction
(:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.xor <int_vector_reduce_xor>`) of the vector argument
``val`` on each enabled lane, performing an '``xor``' of that with the scalar
``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral value
``0`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If the vector length
is zero, the result is the start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.xor.v4i32(i32 %start, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> <i32 0, i32 0, i32 0, i32 0>
      %reduction = call i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.xor.v4i32(<4 x i32> %masked.a)
      %also.r = xor i32 %reduction, %start


.. _int_vp_reduce_smax:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.smax.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.smax.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.smax.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated signed-integer ``MAX`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.smax``' intrinsic performs the signed-integer ``MAX``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.smax <int_vector_reduce_smax>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, and taking the maximum of that and
the scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the
neutral value ``INT_MIN`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation).
If the vector length is zero, the result is the start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i8 @llvm.vp.reduce.smax.v4i8(i8 %start, <4 x i8> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i8> %a, <4 x i8> <i8 -128, i8 -128, i8 -128, i8 -128>
      %reduction = call i8 @llvm.vector.reduce.smax.v4i8(<4 x i8> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call i8 @llvm.smax.i8(i8 %reduction, i8 %start)


.. _int_vp_reduce_smin:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.smin.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.smin.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.smin.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated signed-integer ``MIN`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.smin``' intrinsic performs the signed-integer ``MIN``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.smin <int_vector_reduce_smin>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, and taking the minimum of that and
the scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the
neutral value ``INT_MAX`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation).
If the vector length is zero, the result is the start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i8 @llvm.vp.reduce.smin.v4i8(i8 %start, <4 x i8> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i8> %a, <4 x i8> <i8 127, i8 127, i8 127, i8 127>
      %reduction = call i8 @llvm.vector.reduce.smin.v4i8(<4 x i8> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call i8 @llvm.smin.i8(i8 %reduction, i8 %start)


.. _int_vp_reduce_umax:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.umax.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.umax.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.umax.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated unsigned-integer ``MAX`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.umax``' intrinsic performs the unsigned-integer ``MAX``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.umax <int_vector_reduce_umax>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, and taking the maximum of that and
the scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the
neutral value ``0`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If the
vector length is zero, the result is the start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.umax.v4i32(i32 %start, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> <i32 0, i32 0, i32 0, i32 0>
      %reduction = call i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.umax.v4i32(<4 x i32> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call i32 @llvm.umax.i32(i32 %reduction, i32 %start)


.. _int_vp_reduce_umin:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.umin.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.umin.v4i32(i32 <start_value>, <4 x i32> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i16 @llvm.vp.reduce.umin.nxv8i16(i16 <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x i16> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated unsigned-integer ``MIN`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
integer type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector on
which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of integer values whose
element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the vector mask and
is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the vector
argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.umin``' intrinsic performs the unsigned-integer ``MIN``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.umin <int_vector_reduce_umin>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, taking the minimum of that and the
scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral
value ``UINT_MAX``, or ``-1`` (i.e. having no effect on the reduction
operation). If the vector length is zero, the result is the start value.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call i32 @llvm.vp.reduce.umin.v4i32(i32 %start, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> <i32 -1, i32 -1, i32 -1, i32 -1>
      %reduction = call i32 @llvm.vector.reduce.umin.v4i32(<4 x i32> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call i32 @llvm.umin.i32(i32 %reduction, i32 %start)


.. _int_vp_reduce_fmax:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.fmax.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmax.v4f32(float <start_value>, <4 x float> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, float <vector_length>)
      declare double @llvm.vp.reduce.fmax.nxv8f64(double <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x double> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point ``MAX`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
floating-point type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector
on which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of floating-point
values whose element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the
vector mask and is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements
as the vector argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.fmax``' intrinsic performs the floating-point ``MAX``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmax <int_vector_reduce_fmax>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, taking the maximum of that and the
scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral
value (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If the vector length
is zero, the result is the start value.

The neutral value is dependent on the :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`. If no
flags are set, the neutral value is ``-QNAN``. If ``nnan``  and ``ninf`` are
both set, then the neutral value is the smallest floating-point value for the
result type. If only ``nnan`` is set then the neutral value is ``-Infinity``.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the
:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmax <int_vector_reduce_fmax>` intrinsic (and thus the
'``llvm.maxnum.*``' intrinsic). That is, the result will always be a number
unless all elements of the vector and the starting value are ``NaN``. For a
vector with maximum element magnitude ``0.0`` and containing both ``+0.0`` and
``-0.0`` elements, the sign of the result is unspecified.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmax.v4f32(float %float, <4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %a, <4 x float> <float QNAN, float QNAN, float QNAN, float QNAN>
      %reduction = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmax.v4f32(<4 x float> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call float @llvm.maxnum.f32(float %reduction, float %start)


.. _int_vp_reduce_fmin:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.fmin.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmin.v4f32(float <start_value>, <4 x float> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, float <vector_length>)
      declare double @llvm.vp.reduce.fmin.nxv8f64(double <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x double> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point ``MIN`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
floating-point type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector
on which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of floating-point
values whose element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the
vector mask and is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements
as the vector argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.fmin``' intrinsic performs the floating-point ``MIN``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmin <int_vector_reduce_fmin>`) of the
vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, taking the minimum of that and the
scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral
value (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If the vector length
is zero, the result is the start value.

The neutral value is dependent on the :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`. If no
flags are set, the neutral value is ``+QNAN``. If ``nnan``  and ``ninf`` are
both set, then the neutral value is the largest floating-point value for the
result type. If only ``nnan`` is set then the neutral value is ``+Infinity``.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the
:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmin <int_vector_reduce_fmin>` intrinsic (and thus the
'``llvm.minnum.*``' intrinsic). That is, the result will always be a number
unless all elements of the vector and the starting value are ``NaN``. For a
vector with maximum element magnitude ``0.0`` and containing both ``+0.0`` and
``-0.0`` elements, the sign of the result is unspecified.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmin.v4f32(float %start, <4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %a, <4 x float> <float QNAN, float QNAN, float QNAN, float QNAN>
      %reduction = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmin.v4f32(<4 x float> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call float @llvm.minnum.f32(float %reduction, float %start)


.. _int_vp_reduce_fmaximum:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.fmaximum.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmaximum.v4f32(float <start_value>, <4 x float> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, float <vector_length>)
      declare double @llvm.vp.reduce.fmaximum.nxv8f64(double <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x double> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point ``MAX`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
floating-point type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector
on which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of floating-point
values whose element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the
vector mask and is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements
as the vector argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.fmaximum``' intrinsic performs the floating-point ``MAX``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmaximum <int_vector_reduce_fmaximum>`) of
the vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, taking the maximum of that and
the scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the
neutral value (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If the vector
length is zero, the result is the start value.

The neutral value is dependent on the :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`. If no
flags are set or only the ``nnan`` is set, the neutral value is ``-Infinity``.
If ``ninf`` is set, then the neutral value is the smallest floating-point value
for the result type.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the
:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fmaximum <int_vector_reduce_fmaximum>` intrinsic (and
thus the '``llvm.maximum.*``' intrinsic). That is, the result will always be a
number unless any of the elements in the vector or the starting value is
``NaN``. Namely, this intrinsic propagates ``NaN``. Also, -0.0 is considered
less than +0.0.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call float @llvm.vp.reduce.fmaximum.v4f32(float %float, <4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %a, <4 x float> <float -infinity, float -infinity, float -infinity, float -infinity>
      %reduction = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fmaximum.v4f32(<4 x float> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call float @llvm.maximum.f32(float %reduction, float %start)


.. _int_vp_reduce_fminimum:

'``llvm.vp.reduce.fminimum.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare float @llvm.vp.reduce.fminimum.v4f32(float <start_value>, <4 x float> <val>, <4 x i1> <mask>, float <vector_length>)
      declare double @llvm.vp.reduce.fminimum.nxv8f64(double <start_value>, <vscale x 8 x double> <val>, <vscale x 8 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point ``MIN`` reduction of a vector and a scalar starting
value, returning the result as a scalar.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the start value of the reduction, which must be a scalar
floating-point type equal to the result type. The second argument is the vector
on which the reduction is performed and must be a vector of floating-point
values whose element type is the result/start type. The third argument is the
vector mask and is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements
as the vector argument. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.reduce.fminimum``' intrinsic performs the floating-point ``MIN``
reduction (:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fminimum <int_vector_reduce_fminimum>`) of
the vector argument ``val`` on each enabled lane, taking the minimum of that and
the scalar ``start_value``. Disabled lanes are treated as containing the neutral
value (i.e. having no effect on the reduction operation). If the vector length
is zero, the result is the start value.

The neutral value is dependent on the :ref:`fast-math flags <fastmath>`. If no
flags are set or only the ``nnan`` is set, the neutral value is ``+Infinity``.
If ``ninf`` is set, then the neutral value is the largest floating-point value
for the result type.

This instruction has the same comparison semantics as the
:ref:`llvm.vector.reduce.fminimum <int_vector_reduce_fminimum>` intrinsic (and
thus the '``llvm.minimum.*``' intrinsic). That is, the result will always be a
number unless any of the elements in the vector or the starting value is
``NaN``. Namely, this intrinsic propagates ``NaN``. Also, -0.0 is considered
less than +0.0.

To ignore the start value, the neutral value can be used.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call float @llvm.vp.reduce.fminimum.v4f32(float %start, <4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ; %r is equivalent to %also.r, where lanes greater than or equal to %evl
      ; are treated as though %mask were false for those lanes.

      %masked.a = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %a, <4 x float> <float infinity, float infinity, float infinity, float infinity>
      %reduction = call float @llvm.vector.reduce.fminimum.v4f32(<4 x float> %masked.a)
      %also.r = call float @llvm.minimum.f32(float %reduction, float %start)


.. _int_get_active_lane_mask:

'``llvm.get.active.lane.mask.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <4 x i1> @llvm.get.active.lane.mask.v4i1.i32(i32 %base, i32 %n)
      declare <8 x i1> @llvm.get.active.lane.mask.v8i1.i64(i64 %base, i64 %n)
      declare <16 x i1> @llvm.get.active.lane.mask.v16i1.i64(i64 %base, i64 %n)
      declare <vscale x 16 x i1> @llvm.get.active.lane.mask.nxv16i1.i64(i64 %base, i64 %n)


Overview:
"""""""""

Create a mask representing active and inactive vector lanes.


Arguments:
""""""""""

Both arguments have the same scalar integer type. The result is a vector with
the i1 element type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.get.active.lane.mask.*``' intrinsics are semantically equivalent
to:

::

      %m[i] = icmp ult (%base + i), %n

where ``%m`` is a vector (mask) of active/inactive lanes with its elements
indexed by ``i``,  and ``%base``, ``%n`` are the two arguments to
``llvm.get.active.lane.mask.*``, ``%icmp`` is an integer compare and ``ult``
the unsigned less-than comparison operator.  Overflow cannot occur in
``(%base + i)`` and its comparison against ``%n`` as it is performed in integer
numbers and not in machine numbers.  If ``%n`` is ``0``, then the result is a
poison value. The above is equivalent to:

::

      %m = @llvm.get.active.lane.mask(%base, %n)

This can, for example, be emitted by the loop vectorizer in which case
``%base`` is the first element of the vector induction variable (VIV) and
``%n`` is the loop tripcount. Thus, these intrinsics perform an element-wise
less than comparison of VIV with the loop tripcount, producing a mask of
true/false values representing active/inactive vector lanes, except if the VIV
overflows in which case they return false in the lanes where the VIV overflows.
The arguments are scalar types to accommodate scalable vector types, for which
it is unknown what the type of the step vector needs to be that enumerate its
lanes without overflow.

This mask ``%m`` can e.g. be used in masked load/store instructions. These
intrinsics provide a hint to the backend. I.e., for a vector loop, the
back-edge taken count of the original scalar loop is explicit as the second
argument.


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %active.lane.mask = call <4 x i1> @llvm.get.active.lane.mask.v4i1.i64(i64 %elem0, i64 429)
      %wide.masked.load = call <4 x i32> @llvm.masked.load.v4i32.p0v4i32(<4 x i32>* %3, i32 4, <4 x i1> %active.lane.mask, <4 x i32> poison)


.. _int_experimental_vp_splice:

'``llvm.experimental.vp.splice``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <2 x double> @llvm.experimental.vp.splice.v2f64(<2 x double> %vec1, <2 x double> %vec2, i32 %imm, <2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl1, i32 %evl2)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vp.splice.nxv4i32(<vscale x 4 x i32> %vec1, <vscale x 4 x i32> %vec2, i32 %imm, <vscale x 4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl1, i32 %evl2)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.vp.splice.*``' intrinsic is the vector length
predicated version of the '``llvm.vector.splice.*``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The result and the first two arguments ``vec1`` and ``vec2`` are vectors with
the same type.  The third argument ``imm`` is an immediate signed integer that
indicates the offset index.  The fourth argument ``mask`` is a vector mask and
has the same number of elements as the result.  The last two arguments ``evl1``
and ``evl2`` are unsigned integers indicating the explicit vector lengths of
``vec1`` and ``vec2`` respectively.  ``imm``, ``evl1`` and ``evl2`` should
respect the following constraints: ``-evl1 <= imm < evl1``, ``0 <= evl1 <= VL``
and ``0 <= evl2 <= VL``, where ``VL`` is the runtime vector factor. If these
constraints are not satisfied the intrinsic has undefined behavior.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Effectively, this intrinsic concatenates ``vec1[0..evl1-1]`` and
``vec2[0..evl2-1]`` and creates the result vector by selecting the elements in a
window of size ``evl2``, starting at index ``imm`` (for a positive immediate) of
the concatenated vector. Elements in the result vector beyond ``evl2`` are
``undef``.  If ``imm`` is negative the starting index is ``evl1 + imm``.  The result
vector of active vector length ``evl2`` contains ``evl1 - imm`` (``-imm`` for
negative ``imm``) elements from indices ``[imm..evl1 - 1]``
(``[evl1 + imm..evl1 -1]`` for negative ``imm``) of ``vec1`` followed by the
first ``evl2 - (evl1 - imm)`` (``evl2 + imm`` for negative ``imm``) elements of
``vec2``. If ``evl1 - imm`` (``-imm``) >= ``evl2``, only the first ``evl2``
elements are considered and the remaining are ``undef``.  The lanes in the result
vector disabled by ``mask`` are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

 llvm.experimental.vp.splice(<A,B,C,D>, <E,F,G,H>, 1, 2, 3);  ==> <B, E, F, poison> index
 llvm.experimental.vp.splice(<A,B,C,D>, <E,F,G,H>, -2, 3, 2); ==> <B, C, poison, poison> trailing elements


.. _int_experimental_vp_splat:


'``llvm.experimental.vp.splat``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <2 x double> @llvm.experimental.vp.splat.v2f64(double %scalar, <2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vp.splat.nxv4i32(i32 %scalar, <vscale x 4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.vp.splat.*``' intrinsic is to create a predicated splat
with specific effective vector length.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The result is a vector and it is a splat of the first scalar argument. The
second argument ``mask`` is a vector mask and has the same number of elements as
the result. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic splats a vector with ``evl`` elements of a scalar argument.
The lanes in the result vector disabled by ``mask`` are ``poison``. The
elements past ``evl`` are poison.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.splat.v4f32(float %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r
      %e = insertelement <4 x float> poison, float %a, i32 0
      %s = shufflevector <4 x float> %e, <4 x float> poison, <4 x i32> zeroinitializer
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %s, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_experimental_vp_reverse:


'``llvm.experimental.vp.reverse``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <2 x double> @llvm.experimental.vp.reverse.v2f64(<2 x double> %vec, <2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.experimental.vp.reverse.nxv4i32(<vscale x 4 x i32> %vec, <vscale x 4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.vp.reverse.*``' intrinsic is the vector length
predicated version of the '``llvm.vector.reverse.*``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The result and the first argument ``vec`` are vectors with the same type.
The second argument ``mask`` is a vector mask and has the same number of
elements as the result. The third argument is the explicit vector length of
the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic reverses the order of the first ``evl`` elements in a vector.
The lanes in the result vector disabled by ``mask`` are ``poison``. The
elements past ``evl`` are poison.

.. _int_vp_load:

'``llvm.vp.load``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

    declare <4 x float> @llvm.vp.load.v4f32.p0(ptr %ptr, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare <vscale x 2 x i16> @llvm.vp.load.nxv2i16.p0(ptr %ptr, <vscale x 2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare <8 x float> @llvm.vp.load.v8f32.p1(ptr addrspace(1) %ptr, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare <vscale x 1 x i64> @llvm.vp.load.nxv1i64.p6(ptr addrspace(6) %ptr, <vscale x 1 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.load.*``' intrinsic is the vector length predicated version of
the :ref:`llvm.masked.load <int_mload>` intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the base pointer for the load. The second argument is a
vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the return type.
The third is the explicit vector length of the operation. The return type and
underlying type of the base pointer are the same vector types.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the first
argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.load``' intrinsic reads a vector from memory in the same way as
the '``llvm.masked.load``' intrinsic, where the mask is taken from the
combination of the '``mask``' and '``evl``' arguments in the usual VP way.
Certain '``llvm.masked.load``' arguments do not have corresponding arguments in
'``llvm.vp.load``': the '``passthru``' argument is implicitly ``poison``; the
'``alignment``' argument is taken as the ``align`` parameter attribute, if
provided. The default alignment is taken as the ABI alignment of the return
type as specified by the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

     %r = call <8 x i8> @llvm.vp.load.v8i8.p0(ptr align 2 %ptr, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
     ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

     %also.r = call <8 x i8> @llvm.masked.load.v8i8.p0(ptr %ptr, i32 2, <8 x i1> %mask, <8 x i8> poison)


.. _int_vp_store:

'``llvm.vp.store``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

    declare void @llvm.vp.store.v4f32.p0(<4 x float> %val, ptr %ptr, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare void @llvm.vp.store.nxv2i16.p0(<vscale x 2 x i16> %val, ptr %ptr, <vscale x 2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare void @llvm.vp.store.v8f32.p1(<8 x float> %val, ptr addrspace(1) %ptr, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare void @llvm.vp.store.nxv1i64.p6(<vscale x 1 x i64> %val, ptr addrspace(6) %ptr, <vscale x 1 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.store.*``' intrinsic is the vector length predicated version of
the :ref:`llvm.masked.store <int_mstore>` intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the vector value to be written to memory. The second
argument is the base pointer for the store. It has the same underlying type as
the value argument. The third argument is a vector of boolean values with the
same number of elements as the return type. The fourth is the explicit vector
length of the operation.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the
second argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.store``' intrinsic reads a vector from memory in the same way as
the '``llvm.masked.store``' intrinsic, where the mask is taken from the
combination of the '``mask``' and '``evl``' arguments in the usual VP way. The
alignment of the operation (corresponding to the '``alignment``' argument of
'``llvm.masked.store``') is specified by the ``align`` parameter attribute (see
above). If it is not provided then the ABI alignment of the type of the
'``value``' argument as specified by the :ref:`datalayout
string<langref_datalayout>` is used instead.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

     call void @llvm.vp.store.v8i8.p0(<8 x i8> %val, ptr align 4 %ptr, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
     ;; For all lanes below %evl, the call above is lane-wise equivalent to the call below.

     call void @llvm.masked.store.v8i8.p0(<8 x i8> %val, ptr %ptr, i32 4, <8 x i1> %mask)


.. _int_experimental_vp_strided_load:

'``llvm.experimental.vp.strided.load``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

    declare <4 x float> @llvm.experimental.vp.strided.load.v4f32.i64(ptr %ptr, i64 %stride, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare <vscale x 2 x i16> @llvm.experimental.vp.strided.load.nxv2i16.i64(ptr %ptr, i64 %stride, <vscale x 2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.vp.strided.load``' intrinsic loads, into a vector, scalar values from
memory locations evenly spaced apart by '``stride``' number of bytes, starting from '``ptr``'.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the base pointer for the load. The second argument is the stride
value expressed in bytes. The third argument is a vector of boolean values
with the same number of elements as the return type. The fourth is the explicit
vector length of the operation. The base pointer underlying type matches the type of the scalar
elements of the return argument.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the first
argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.vp.strided.load``' intrinsic loads, into a vector, multiple scalar
values from memory in the same way as the :ref:`llvm.vp.gather <int_vp_gather>` intrinsic,
where the vector of pointers is in the form:

   ``%ptrs = <%ptr, %ptr + %stride, %ptr + 2 * %stride, ... >``,

with '``ptr``' previously casted to a pointer '``i8``', '``stride``' always interpreted as a signed
integer and all arithmetic occurring in the pointer type.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

	 %r = call <8 x i64> @llvm.experimental.vp.strided.load.v8i64.i64(i64* %ptr, i64 %stride, <8 x i64> %mask, i32 %evl)
	 ;; The operation can also be expressed like this:

	 %addr = bitcast i64* %ptr to i8*
	 ;; Create a vector of pointers %addrs in the form:
	 ;; %addrs = <%addr, %addr + %stride, %addr + 2 * %stride, ...>
	 %ptrs = bitcast <8 x i8* > %addrs to <8 x i64* >
	 %also.r = call <8 x i64> @llvm.vp.gather.v8i64.v8p0i64(<8 x i64* > %ptrs, <8 x i64> %mask, i32 %evl)


.. _int_experimental_vp_strided_store:

'``llvm.experimental.vp.strided.store``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

    declare void @llvm.experimental.vp.strided.store.v4f32.i64(<4 x float> %val, ptr %ptr, i64 %stride, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare void @llvm.experimental.vp.strided.store.nxv2i16.i64(<vscale x 2 x i16> %val, ptr %ptr, i64 %stride, <vscale x 2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``@llvm.experimental.vp.strided.store``' intrinsic stores the elements of
'``val``' into memory locations evenly spaced apart by '``stride``' number of
bytes, starting from '``ptr``'.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the vector value to be written to memory. The second
argument is the base pointer for the store. Its underlying type matches the
scalar element type of the value argument. The third argument is the stride value
expressed in bytes. The fourth argument is a vector of boolean values with the
same number of elements as the return type. The fifth is the explicit vector
length of the operation.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the
second argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.vp.strided.store``' intrinsic stores the elements of
'``val``' in the same way as the :ref:`llvm.vp.scatter <int_vp_scatter>` intrinsic,
where the vector of pointers is in the form:

	``%ptrs = <%ptr, %ptr + %stride, %ptr + 2 * %stride, ... >``,

with '``ptr``' previously casted to a pointer '``i8``', '``stride``' always interpreted as a signed
integer and all arithmetic occurring in the pointer type.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

	 call void @llvm.experimental.vp.strided.store.v8i64.i64(<8 x i64> %val, i64* %ptr, i64 %stride, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
	 ;; The operation can also be expressed like this:

	 %addr = bitcast i64* %ptr to i8*
	 ;; Create a vector of pointers %addrs in the form:
	 ;; %addrs = <%addr, %addr + %stride, %addr + 2 * %stride, ...>
	 %ptrs = bitcast <8 x i8* > %addrs to <8 x i64* >
	 call void @llvm.vp.scatter.v8i64.v8p0i64(<8 x i64> %val, <8 x i64*> %ptrs, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)


.. _int_vp_gather:

'``llvm.vp.gather``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

    declare <4 x double> @llvm.vp.gather.v4f64.v4p0(<4 x ptr> %ptrs, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare <vscale x 2 x i8> @llvm.vp.gather.nxv2i8.nxv2p0(<vscale x 2 x ptr> %ptrs, <vscale x 2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare <2 x float> @llvm.vp.gather.v2f32.v2p2(<2 x ptr addrspace(2)> %ptrs, <2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.vp.gather.nxv4i32.nxv4p4(<vscale x 4 x ptr addrspace(4)> %ptrs, <vscale x 4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.gather.*``' intrinsic is the vector length predicated version of
the :ref:`llvm.masked.gather <int_mgather>` intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a vector of pointers which holds all memory addresses to
read. The second argument is a vector of boolean values with the same number of
elements as the return type. The third is the explicit vector length of the
operation. The return type and underlying type of the vector of pointers are
the same vector types.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the first
argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.gather``' intrinsic reads multiple scalar values from memory in
the same way as the '``llvm.masked.gather``' intrinsic, where the mask is taken
from the combination of the '``mask``' and '``evl``' arguments in the usual VP
way. Certain '``llvm.masked.gather``' arguments do not have corresponding
arguments in '``llvm.vp.gather``': the '``passthru``' argument is implicitly
``poison``; the '``alignment``' argument is taken as the ``align`` parameter, if
provided. The default alignment is taken as the ABI alignment of the source
addresses as specified by the :ref:`datalayout string<langref_datalayout>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

     %r = call <8 x i8> @llvm.vp.gather.v8i8.v8p0(<8 x ptr>  align 8 %ptrs, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
     ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

     %also.r = call <8 x i8> @llvm.masked.gather.v8i8.v8p0(<8 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 8, <8 x i1> %mask, <8 x i8> poison)


.. _int_vp_scatter:

'``llvm.vp.scatter``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

    declare void @llvm.vp.scatter.v4f64.v4p0(<4 x double> %val, <4 x ptr> %ptrs, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare void @llvm.vp.scatter.nxv2i8.nxv2p0(<vscale x 2 x i8> %val, <vscale x 2 x ptr> %ptrs, <vscale x 2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare void @llvm.vp.scatter.v2f32.v2p2(<2 x float> %val, <2 x ptr addrspace(2)> %ptrs, <2 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
    declare void @llvm.vp.scatter.nxv4i32.nxv4p4(<vscale x 4 x i32> %val, <vscale x 4 x ptr addrspace(4)> %ptrs, <vscale x 4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.scatter.*``' intrinsic is the vector length predicated version of
the :ref:`llvm.masked.scatter <int_mscatter>` intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a vector value to be written to memory. The second argument
is a vector of pointers, pointing to where the value elements should be stored.
The third argument is a vector of boolean values with the same number of
elements as the return type. The fourth is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the
second argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.scatter``' intrinsic writes multiple scalar values to memory in
the same way as the '``llvm.masked.scatter``' intrinsic, where the mask is
taken from the combination of the '``mask``' and '``evl``' arguments in the
usual VP way. The '``alignment``' argument of the '``llvm.masked.scatter``' does
not have a corresponding argument in '``llvm.vp.scatter``': it is instead
provided via the optional ``align`` parameter attribute on the
vector-of-pointers argument. Otherwise it is taken as the ABI alignment of the
destination addresses as specified by the :ref:`datalayout
string<langref_datalayout>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: text

     call void @llvm.vp.scatter.v8i8.v8p0(<8 x i8> %val, <8 x ptr> align 1 %ptrs, <8 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
     ;; For all lanes below %evl, the call above is lane-wise equivalent to the call below.

     call void @llvm.masked.scatter.v8i8.v8p0(<8 x i8> %val, <8 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 1, <8 x i1> %mask)


.. _int_vp_trunc:

'``llvm.vp.trunc.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i16>  @llvm.vp.trunc.v16i16.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i16>  @llvm.vp.trunc.nxv4i16.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.trunc``' intrinsic truncates its first argument to the return
type. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.trunc``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The return type is the type to cast the value to. Both types must be vector of
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` type. The bit size of the value must be larger than
the bit size of the return type. The second argument is the vector mask. The
return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have the same number of
elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.trunc``' intrinsic truncates the high order bits in value and
converts the remaining bits to return type. Since the source size must be larger
than the destination size, '``llvm.vp.trunc``' cannot be a *no-op cast*. It will
always truncate bits. The conversion is performed on lane positions below the
explicit vector length and where the vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are
``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i16> @llvm.vp.trunc.v4i16.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = trunc <4 x i32> %a to <4 x i16>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i16> %t, <4 x i16> poison


.. _int_vp_zext:

'``llvm.vp.zext.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.zext.v16i32.v16i16 (<16 x i16> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.zext.nxv4i32.nxv4i16 (<vscale x 4 x i16> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.zext``' intrinsic zero extends its first argument to the return
type. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.zext``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The return type is the type to cast the value to. Both types must be vectors of
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` type. The bit size of the value must be smaller than
the bit size of the return type. The second argument is the vector mask. The
return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have the same number of
elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.zext``' intrinsic fill the high order bits of the value with zero
bits until it reaches the size of the return type. When zero extending from i1,
the result will always be either 0 or 1. The conversion is performed on lane
positions below the explicit vector length and where the vector mask is true.
Masked-off lanes are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.zext.v4i32.v4i16(<4 x i16> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = zext <4 x i16> %a to <4 x i32>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_sext:

'``llvm.vp.sext.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sext.v16i32.v16i16 (<16 x i16> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sext.nxv4i32.nxv4i16 (<vscale x 4 x i16> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sext``' intrinsic sign extends its first argument to the return
type. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sext``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The return type is the type to cast the value to. Both types must be vectors of
:ref:`integer <t_integer>` type. The bit size of the value must be smaller than
the bit size of the return type. The second argument is the vector mask. The
return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have the same number of
elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sext``' intrinsic performs a sign extension by copying the sign
bit (highest order bit) of the value until it reaches the size of the return
type. When sign extending from i1, the result will always be either -1 or 0.
The conversion is performed on lane positions below the explicit vector length
and where the vector mask is true. Masked-off lanes are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.sext.v4i32.v4i16(<4 x i16> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = sext <4 x i16> %a to <4 x i32>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_fptrunc:

'``llvm.vp.fptrunc.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.fptrunc.v16f32.v16f64 (<16 x double> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.trunc.nxv4f32.nxv4f64 (<vscale x 4 x double> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptrunc``' intrinsic truncates its first argument to the return
type. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptrunc``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The return type is the type to cast the value to. Both types must be vector of
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type. The bit size of the value must be
larger than the bit size of the return type. This implies that
'``llvm.vp.fptrunc``' cannot be used to make a *no-op cast*. The second argument
is the vector mask. The return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have
the same number of elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of
the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptrunc``' intrinsic casts a ``value`` from a larger
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type to a smaller :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` type.
This instruction is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>`. The conversion is performed on lane positions below the
explicit vector length and where the vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are
``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.fptrunc.v4f32.v4f64(<4 x double> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fptrunc <4 x double> %a to <4 x float>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_fpext:

'``llvm.vp.fpext.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x double>  @llvm.vp.fpext.v16f64.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x double>  @llvm.vp.fpext.nxv4f64.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fpext``' intrinsic extends its first argument to the return
type. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fpext``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The return type is the type to cast the value to. Both types must be vector of
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type. The bit size of the value must be
smaller than the bit size of the return type. This implies that
'``llvm.vp.fpext``' cannot be used to make a *no-op cast*. The second argument
is the vector mask. The return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have
the same number of elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of
the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fpext``' intrinsic extends the ``value`` from a smaller
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type to a larger :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` type. The '``llvm.vp.fpext``' cannot be used to make a
*no-op cast* because it always changes bits. Use ``bitcast`` to make a
*no-op cast* for a floating-point cast.
The conversion is performed on lane positions below the explicit vector length
and where the vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x double> @llvm.vp.fpext.v4f64.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fpext <4 x float> %a to <4 x double>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x double> %t, <4 x double> poison


.. _int_vp_fptoui:

'``llvm.vp.fptoui.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fptoui.v16i32.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fptoui.nxv4i32.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.fptoui.v256i64.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptoui``' intrinsic converts the :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` argument to the unsigned integer return type.
The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptoui``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The value to cast must be a vector of :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type.
The return type is the type to cast the value to. The return type must be
vector of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type.  The second argument is the vector
mask. The return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have the same
number of elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptoui``' intrinsic converts its :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` argument into the nearest (rounding towards zero) unsigned integer
value where the lane position is below the explicit vector length and the
vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are ``poison``. On enabled lanes where
conversion takes place and the value cannot fit in the return type, the result
on that lane is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.fptoui.v4i32.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fptoui <4 x float> %a to <4 x i32>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_fptosi:

'``llvm.vp.fptosi.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fptosi.v16i32.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fptosi.nxv4i32.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.fptosi.v256i64.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptosi``' intrinsic converts the :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` argument to the signed integer return type.
The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptosi``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The value to cast must be a vector of :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type.
The return type is the type to cast the value to. The return type must be
vector of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type.  The second argument is the vector
mask. The return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have the same
number of elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fptosi``' intrinsic converts its :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` argument into the nearest (rounding towards zero) signed integer
value where the lane position is below the explicit vector length and the
vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are ``poison``. On enabled lanes where
conversion takes place and the value cannot fit in the return type, the result
on that lane is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.fptosi.v4i32.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fptosi <4 x float> %a to <4 x i32>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_uitofp:

'``llvm.vp.uitofp.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.uitofp.v16f32.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.uitofp.nxv4f32.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.uitofp.v256f64.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.uitofp``' intrinsic converts its unsigned integer argument to the
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` return type.  The operation has a mask and
an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.uitofp``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The value to cast must be vector of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type.  The
return type is the type to cast the value to.  The return type must be a vector
of :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type.  The second argument is the vector
mask. The return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have the same
number of elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.uitofp``' intrinsic interprets its first argument as an unsigned
integer quantity and converts it to the corresponding floating-point value. If
the value cannot be exactly represented, it is rounded using the default
rounding mode.  The conversion is performed on lane positions below the
explicit vector length and where the vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are
``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.uitofp.v4f32.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = uitofp <4 x i32> %a to <4 x float>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_sitofp:

'``llvm.vp.sitofp.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.sitofp.v16f32.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.sitofp.nxv4f32.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.sitofp.v256f64.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sitofp``' intrinsic converts its signed integer argument to the
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` return type.  The operation has a mask and
an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sitofp``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument.
The value to cast must be vector of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type.  The
return type is the type to cast the value to.  The return type must be a vector
of :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type.  The second argument is the vector
mask. The return type, the value to cast, and the vector mask have the same
number of elements.  The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sitofp``' intrinsic interprets its first argument as a signed
integer quantity and converts it to the corresponding floating-point value. If
the value cannot be exactly represented, it is rounded using the default
rounding mode.  The conversion is performed on lane positions below the
explicit vector length and where the vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are
``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.sitofp.v4f32.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = sitofp <4 x i32> %a to <4 x float>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison


.. _int_vp_ptrtoint:

'``llvm.vp.ptrtoint.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i8>  @llvm.vp.ptrtoint.v16i8.v16p0(<16 x ptr> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i8>  @llvm.vp.ptrtoint.nxv4i8.nxv4p0(<vscale x 4 x ptr> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.ptrtoint.v16i64.v16p0(<256 x ptr> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ptrtoint``' intrinsic converts its pointer to the integer return
type.  The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ptrtoint``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument
, which must be a vector of pointers, and a type to cast it to return type,
which must be a vector of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type.
The second argument is the vector mask. The return type, the value to cast, and
the vector mask have the same number of elements.
The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ptrtoint``' intrinsic converts value to return type by
interpreting the pointer value as an integer and either truncating or zero
extending that value to the size of the integer type.
If ``value`` is smaller than return type, then a zero extension is done. If
``value`` is larger than return type, then a truncation is done. If they are
the same size, then nothing is done (*no-op cast*) other than a type
change.
The conversion is performed on lane positions below the explicit vector length
and where the vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i8> @llvm.vp.ptrtoint.v4i8.v4p0i32(<4 x ptr> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = ptrtoint <4 x ptr> %a to <4 x i8>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i8> %t, <4 x i8> poison


.. _int_vp_inttoptr:

'``llvm.vp.inttoptr.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x ptr>  @llvm.vp.inttoptr.v16p0.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x ptr>  @llvm.vp.inttoptr.nxv4p0.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x ptr>  @llvm.vp.inttoptr.v256p0.v256i32 (<256 x i32> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.inttoptr``' intrinsic converts its integer value to the point
return type. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.inttoptr``' intrinsic takes a value to cast as its first argument
, which must be a vector of :ref:`integer <t_integer>` type, and a type to cast
it to return type, which must be a vector of pointers type.
The second argument is the vector mask. The return type, the value to cast, and
the vector mask have the same number of elements.
The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.inttoptr``' intrinsic converts ``value`` to return type by
applying either a zero extension or a truncation depending on the size of the
integer ``value``. If ``value`` is larger than the size of a pointer, then a
truncation is done. If ``value`` is smaller than the size of a pointer, then a
zero extension is done. If they are the same size, nothing is done (*no-op cast*).
The conversion is performed on lane positions below the explicit vector length
and where the vector mask is true.  Masked-off lanes are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x ptr> @llvm.vp.inttoptr.v4p0i32.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = inttoptr <4 x i32> %a to <4 x ptr>
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x ptr> %t, <4 x ptr> poison


.. _int_vp_fcmp:

'``llvm.vp.fcmp.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i1> @llvm.vp.fcmp.v16f32(<16 x float> <left_op>, <16 x float> <right_op>, metadata <condition code>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i1> @llvm.vp.fcmp.nxv4f32(<vscale x 4 x float> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x float> <right_op>, metadata <condition code>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i1> @llvm.vp.fcmp.v256f64(<256 x double> <left_op>, <256 x double> <right_op>, metadata <condition code>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fcmp``' intrinsic returns a vector of boolean values based on
the comparison of its arguments. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector
length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fcmp``' intrinsic takes the two values to compare as its first
and second arguments. These two values must be vectors of :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` types.
The return type is the result of the comparison. The return type must be a
vector of :ref:`i1 <t_integer>` type. The fourth argument is the vector mask.
The return type, the values to compare, and the vector mask have the same
number of elements. The third argument is the condition code indicating the kind
of comparison to perform. It must be a metadata string with :ref:`one of the
supported floating-point condition code values <fcmp_md_cc>`. The fifth argument
is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fcmp``' compares its first two arguments according to the
condition code given as the third argument. The arguments are compared element by
element on each enabled lane, where the semantics of the comparison are
defined :ref:`according to the condition code <fcmp_md_cc_sem>`. Masked-off
lanes are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i1> @llvm.vp.fcmp.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x float> %b, metadata !"oeq", <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = fcmp oeq <4 x float> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i1> %t, <4 x i1> poison


.. _int_vp_icmp:

'``llvm.vp.icmp.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <32 x i1> @llvm.vp.icmp.v32i32(<32 x i32> <left_op>, <32 x i32> <right_op>, metadata <condition code>, <32 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 2 x i1> @llvm.vp.icmp.nxv2i32(<vscale x 2 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 2 x i32> <right_op>, metadata <condition code>, <vscale x 2 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <128 x i1> @llvm.vp.icmp.v128i8(<128 x i8> <left_op>, <128 x i8> <right_op>, metadata <condition code>, <128 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.icmp``' intrinsic returns a vector of boolean values based on
the comparison of its arguments. The operation has a mask and an explicit vector
length parameter.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.icmp``' intrinsic takes the two values to compare as its first
and second arguments. These two values must be vectors of :ref:`integer
<t_integer>` types.
The return type is the result of the comparison. The return type must be a
vector of :ref:`i1 <t_integer>` type. The fourth argument is the vector mask.
The return type, the values to compare, and the vector mask have the same
number of elements. The third argument is the condition code indicating the kind
of comparison to perform. It must be a metadata string with :ref:`one of the
supported integer condition code values <icmp_md_cc>`. The fifth argument is the
explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.icmp``' compares its first two arguments according to the
condition code given as the third argument. The arguments are compared element by
element on each enabled lane, where the semantics of the comparison are
defined :ref:`according to the condition code <icmp_md_cc_sem>`. Masked-off
lanes are ``poison``.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i1> @llvm.vp.icmp.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, metadata !"ne", <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = icmp ne <4 x i32> %a, %b
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i1> %t, <4 x i1> poison

.. _int_vp_ceil:

'``llvm.vp.ceil.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.ceil.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.ceil.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.ceil.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point ceiling of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ceil``' intrinsic performs floating-point ceiling
(:ref:`ceil <int_ceil>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled lane. The
result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.ceil.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.ceil.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison

.. _int_vp_floor:

'``llvm.vp.floor.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.floor.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.floor.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.floor.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point floor of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.floor``' intrinsic performs floating-point floor
(:ref:`floor <int_floor>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled lane.
The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.floor.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.floor.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison

.. _int_vp_rint:

'``llvm.vp.rint.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.rint.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.rint.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.rint.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point rint of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.rint``' intrinsic performs floating-point rint
(:ref:`rint <int_rint>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled lane.
The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.rint.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.rint.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison

.. _int_vp_nearbyint:

'``llvm.vp.nearbyint.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.nearbyint.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.nearbyint.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.nearbyint.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point nearbyint of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.nearbyint``' intrinsic performs floating-point nearbyint
(:ref:`nearbyint <int_nearbyint>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled lane.
The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.nearbyint.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.nearbyint.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison

.. _int_vp_round:

'``llvm.vp.round.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.round.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.round.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.round.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point round of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.round``' intrinsic performs floating-point round
(:ref:`round <int_round>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled lane.
The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.round.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.round.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison

.. _int_vp_roundeven:

'``llvm.vp.roundeven.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.roundeven.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.roundeven.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.roundeven.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point roundeven of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.roundeven``' intrinsic performs floating-point roundeven
(:ref:`roundeven <int_roundeven>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled
lane. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.roundeven.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.roundeven.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison

.. _int_vp_roundtozero:

'``llvm.vp.roundtozero.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.vp.roundtozero.v16f32 (<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x float>  @llvm.vp.roundtozero.nxv4f32 (<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x double>  @llvm.vp.roundtozero.v256f64 (<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated floating-point round-to-zero of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of floating-point type.
The second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.roundtozero``' intrinsic performs floating-point roundeven
(:ref:`llvm.trunc <int_llvm_trunc>`) of the first vector argument on each enabled lane.  The
result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x float> @llvm.vp.roundtozero.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x float> @llvm.trunc.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x float> %t, <4 x float> poison

.. _int_vp_lrint:

'``llvm.vp.lrint.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32> @llvm.vp.lrint.v16i32.v16f32(<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.vp.lrint.nxv4i32.nxv4f32(<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64> @llvm.vp.lrint.v256i64.v256f64(<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated lrint of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The result is an integer vector and the first argument is a vector of :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>`
type with the same number of elements as the result vector type. The second
argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the result
vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.lrint``' intrinsic performs lrint (:ref:`lrint <int_lrint>`) of
the first vector argument on each enabled lane. The result on disabled lanes is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.lrint.v4i32.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.lrint.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison

.. _int_vp_llrint:

'``llvm.vp.llrint.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32> @llvm.vp.llrint.v16i32.v16f32(<16 x float> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32> @llvm.vp.llrint.nxv4i32.nxv4f32(<vscale x 4 x float> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64> @llvm.vp.llrint.v256i64.v256f64(<256 x double> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated llrint of a vector of floating-point values.


Arguments:
""""""""""
The result is an integer vector and the first argument is a vector of :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>`
type with the same number of elements as the result vector type. The second
argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the result
vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.llrint``' intrinsic performs lrint (:ref:`llrint <int_llrint>`) of
the first vector argument on each enabled lane. The result on disabled lanes is a
:ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.llrint.v4i32.v4f32(<4 x float> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.llrint.v4f32(<4 x float> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_bitreverse:

'``llvm.vp.bitreverse.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.bitreverse.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.bitreverse.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.bitreverse.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated bitreverse of a vector of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.bitreverse``' intrinsic performs bitreverse (:ref:`bitreverse <int_bitreverse>`) of the first argument on each
enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.bitreverse.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.bitreverse.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_bswap:

'``llvm.vp.bswap.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.bswap.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.bswap.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.bswap.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated bswap of a vector of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.bswap``' intrinsic performs bswap (:ref:`bswap <int_bswap>`) of the first argument on each
enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.bswap.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.bswap.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_ctpop:

'``llvm.vp.ctpop.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ctpop.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ctpop.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.ctpop.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated ctpop of a vector of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ctpop``' intrinsic performs ctpop (:ref:`ctpop <int_ctpop>`) of the first argument on each
enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.ctpop.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.ctpop.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_ctlz:

'``llvm.vp.ctlz.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ctlz.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ctlz.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.ctlz.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated ctlz of a vector of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation. The fourth argument is a constant flag that indicates whether the
intrinsic returns a valid result if the first argument is zero. If the first
argument is zero and the fourth argument is true, the result is poison.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ctlz``' intrinsic performs ctlz (:ref:`ctlz <int_ctlz>`) of the first argument on each
enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.ctlz.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl, i1 false)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.ctlz.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, i1 false)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_cttz:

'``llvm.vp.cttz.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.cttz.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.cttz.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.cttz.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>, i1 <is_zero_poison>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated cttz of a vector of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
second argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The third argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation. The fourth argument is a constant flag that indicates whether the
intrinsic returns a valid result if the first argument is zero. If the first
argument is zero and the fourth argument is true, the result is poison.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.cttz``' intrinsic performs cttz (:ref:`cttz <int_cttz>`) of the first argument on each
enabled lane.  The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.

Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.cttz.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl, i1 false)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.cttz.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, i1 false)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_cttz_elts:

'``llvm.vp.cttz.elts.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ```llvm.vp.cttz.elts``` on any
vector of integer elements, both fixed width and scalable.

::

      declare i32  @llvm.vp.cttz.elts.i32.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <op>, i1 <is_zero_poison>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i64  @llvm.vp.cttz.elts.i64.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <op>, i1 <is_zero_poison>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare i64  @llvm.vp.cttz.elts.i64.v256i1 (<256 x i1> <op>, i1 <is_zero_poison>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

This '```llvm.vp.cttz.elts```' intrinsic counts the number of trailing zero
elements of a vector. This is basically the vector-predicated version of
'```llvm.experimental.cttz.elts```'.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the vector to be counted. This argument must be a vector
with integer element type. The return type must also be an integer type which is
wide enough to hold the maximum number of elements of the source vector. The
behavior of this intrinsic is undefined if the return type is not wide enough
for the number of elements in the input vector.

The second argument is a constant flag that indicates whether the intrinsic
returns a valid result if the first argument is all zero.

The third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
input vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.cttz.elts``' intrinsic counts the trailing (least
significant / lowest-numbered) zero elements in the first argument on each
enabled lane. If the first argument is all zero and the second argument is true,
the result is poison. Otherwise, it returns the explicit vector length (i.e. the
fourth argument).

.. _int_vp_sadd_sat:

'``llvm.vp.sadd.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sadd.sat.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op> <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.sadd.sat.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.sadd.sat.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated signed saturating addition of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.sadd.sat``' intrinsic performs sadd.sat (:ref:`sadd.sat <int_sadd_sat>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane. The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.sadd.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.sadd.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_uadd_sat:

'``llvm.vp.uadd.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.uadd.sat.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op> <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.uadd.sat.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.uadd.sat.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated unsigned saturating addition of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.uadd.sat``' intrinsic performs uadd.sat (:ref:`uadd.sat <int_uadd_sat>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane. The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.uadd.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.uadd.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_ssub_sat:

'``llvm.vp.ssub.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ssub.sat.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op> <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.ssub.sat.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.ssub.sat.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated signed saturating subtraction of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.ssub.sat``' intrinsic performs ssub.sat (:ref:`ssub.sat <int_ssub_sat>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane. The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.ssub.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.ssub.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_usub_sat:

'``llvm.vp.usub.sat.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.usub.sat.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op> <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.usub.sat.nxv4i32 (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.usub.sat.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated unsigned saturating subtraction of two vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.usub.sat``' intrinsic performs usub.sat (:ref:`usub.sat <int_usub_sat>`)
of the first and second vector arguments on each enabled lane. The result on
disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.usub.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.usub.sat.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


.. _int_vp_fshl:

'``llvm.vp.fshl.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fshl.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <middle_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fshl.nxv4i32  (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <middle_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.fshl.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <middle_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated fshl of three vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
fourth argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fifth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fshl``' intrinsic performs fshl (:ref:`fshl <int_fshl>`) of the first, second, and third
vector argument on each enabled lane. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.fshl.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i32> %c, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.fshl.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i32> %c)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison


'``llvm.vp.fshr.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <16 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fshr.v16i32 (<16 x i32> <left_op>, <16 x i32> <middle_op>, <16 x i32> <right_op>, <16 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <vscale x 4 x i32>  @llvm.vp.fshr.nxv4i32  (<vscale x 4 x i32> <left_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <middle_op>, <vscale x 4 x i32> <right_op>, <vscale x 4 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <256 x i64>  @llvm.vp.fshr.v256i64 (<256 x i64> <left_op>, <256 x i64> <middle_op>, <256 x i64> <right_op>, <256 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated fshr of three vectors of integers.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments and the result have the same vector of integer type. The
fourth argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fifth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.fshr``' intrinsic performs fshr (:ref:`fshr <int_fshr>`) of the first, second, and third
vector argument on each enabled lane. The result on disabled lanes is a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <4 x i32> @llvm.vp.fshr.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i32> %c, <4 x i1> %mask, i32 %evl)
      ;; For all lanes below %evl, %r is lane-wise equivalent to %also.r

      %t = call <4 x i32> @llvm.fshr.v4i32(<4 x i32> %a, <4 x i32> %b, <4 x i32> %c)
      %also.r = select <4 x i1> %mask, <4 x i32> %t, <4 x i32> poison

'``llvm.vp.is.fpclass.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic.

::

      declare <vscale x 2 x i1> @llvm.vp.is.fpclass.nxv2f32(<vscale x 2 x float> <op>, i32 <test>, <vscale x 2 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)
      declare <2 x i1> @llvm.vp.is.fpclass.v2f16(<2 x half> <op>, i32 <test>, <2 x i1> <mask>, i32 <vector_length>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Predicated llvm.is.fpclass :ref:`llvm.is.fpclass <llvm.is.fpclass>`

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a floating-point vector, the result type is a vector of
boolean with the same number of elements as the first argument.  The second
argument specifies, which tests to perform :ref:`llvm.is.fpclass <llvm.is.fpclass>`.
The third argument is the vector mask and has the same number of elements as the
result vector type. The fourth argument is the explicit vector length of the
operation.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.vp.is.fpclass``' intrinsic performs llvm.is.fpclass (:ref:`llvm.is.fpclass <llvm.is.fpclass>`).


Examples:
"""""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

      %r = call <2 x i1> @llvm.vp.is.fpclass.v2f16(<2 x half> %x, i32 3, <2 x i1> %m, i32 %evl)
      %t = call <vscale x 2 x i1> @llvm.vp.is.fpclass.nxv2f16(<vscale x 2 x half> %x, i32 3, <vscale x 2 x i1> %m, i32 %evl)

.. _int_mload_mstore:

Masked Vector Load and Store Intrinsics
---------------------------------------

LLVM provides intrinsics for predicated vector load and store operations. The predicate is specified by a mask argument, which holds one bit per vector element, switching the associated vector lane on or off. The memory addresses corresponding to the "off" lanes are not accessed. When all bits of the mask are on, the intrinsic is identical to a regular vector load or store. When all bits are off, no memory is accessed.

.. _int_mload:

'``llvm.masked.load.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The loaded data is a vector of any integer, floating-point or pointer data type.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.masked.load.v16f32.p0(ptr <ptr>, i32 <alignment>, <16 x i1> <mask>, <16 x float> <passthru>)
      declare <2 x double>  @llvm.masked.load.v2f64.p0(ptr <ptr>, i32 <alignment>, <2 x i1>  <mask>, <2 x double> <passthru>)
      ;; The data is a vector of pointers
      declare <8 x ptr> @llvm.masked.load.v8p0.p0(ptr <ptr>, i32 <alignment>, <8 x i1> <mask>, <8 x ptr> <passthru>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Reads a vector from memory according to the provided mask. The mask holds a bit for each vector lane, and is used to prevent memory accesses to the masked-off lanes. The masked-off lanes in the result vector are taken from the corresponding lanes of the '``passthru``' argument.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the base pointer for the load. The second argument is the alignment of the source location. It must be a power of two constant integer value. The third argument, mask, is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the return type. The fourth is a pass-through value that is used to fill the masked-off lanes of the result. The return type, underlying type of the base pointer and the type of the '``passthru``' argument are the same vector types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.masked.load``' intrinsic is designed for conditional reading of selected vector elements in a single IR operation. It is useful for targets that support vector masked loads and allows vectorizing predicated basic blocks on these targets. Other targets may support this intrinsic differently, for example by lowering it into a sequence of branches that guard scalar load operations.
The result of this operation is equivalent to a regular vector load instruction followed by a 'select' between the loaded and the passthru values, predicated on the same mask. However, using this intrinsic prevents exceptions on memory access to masked-off lanes.


::

       %res = call <16 x float> @llvm.masked.load.v16f32.p0(ptr %ptr, i32 4, <16 x i1>%mask, <16 x float> %passthru)

       ;; The result of the two following instructions is identical aside from potential memory access exception
       %loadlal = load <16 x float>, ptr %ptr, align 4
       %res = select <16 x i1> %mask, <16 x float> %loadlal, <16 x float> %passthru

.. _int_mstore:

'``llvm.masked.store.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The data stored in memory is a vector of any integer, floating-point or pointer data type.

::

       declare void @llvm.masked.store.v8i32.p0 (<8  x i32>   <value>, ptr <ptr>, i32 <alignment>, <8  x i1> <mask>)
       declare void @llvm.masked.store.v16f32.p0(<16 x float> <value>, ptr <ptr>, i32 <alignment>, <16 x i1> <mask>)
       ;; The data is a vector of pointers
       declare void @llvm.masked.store.v8p0.p0  (<8 x ptr>    <value>, ptr <ptr>, i32 <alignment>, <8 x i1> <mask>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Writes a vector to memory according to the provided mask. The mask holds a bit for each vector lane, and is used to prevent memory accesses to the masked-off lanes.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the vector value to be written to memory. The second argument is the base pointer for the store, it has the same underlying type as the value argument. The third argument is the alignment of the destination location. It must be a power of two constant integer value. The fourth argument, mask, is a vector of boolean values. The types of the mask and the value argument must have the same number of vector elements.


Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.masked.store``' intrinsics is designed for conditional writing of selected vector elements in a single IR operation. It is useful for targets that support vector masked store and allows vectorizing predicated basic blocks on these targets. Other targets may support this intrinsic differently, for example by lowering it into a sequence of branches that guard scalar store operations.
The result of this operation is equivalent to a load-modify-store sequence. However, using this intrinsic prevents exceptions and data races on memory access to masked-off lanes.

::

       call void @llvm.masked.store.v16f32.p0(<16 x float> %value, ptr %ptr, i32 4,  <16 x i1> %mask)

       ;; The result of the following instructions is identical aside from potential data races and memory access exceptions
       %oldval = load <16 x float>, ptr %ptr, align 4
       %res = select <16 x i1> %mask, <16 x float> %value, <16 x float> %oldval
       store <16 x float> %res, ptr %ptr, align 4


Masked Vector Gather and Scatter Intrinsics
-------------------------------------------

LLVM provides intrinsics for vector gather and scatter operations. They are similar to :ref:`Masked Vector Load and Store <int_mload_mstore>`, except they are designed for arbitrary memory accesses, rather than sequential memory accesses. Gather and scatter also employ a mask argument, which holds one bit per vector element, switching the associated vector lane on or off. The memory addresses corresponding to the "off" lanes are not accessed. When all bits are off, no memory is accessed.

.. _int_mgather:

'``llvm.masked.gather.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The loaded data are multiple scalar values of any integer, floating-point or pointer data type gathered together into one vector.

::

      declare <16 x float> @llvm.masked.gather.v16f32.v16p0(<16 x ptr> <ptrs>, i32 <alignment>, <16 x i1> <mask>, <16 x float> <passthru>)
      declare <2 x double> @llvm.masked.gather.v2f64.v2p1(<2 x ptr addrspace(1)> <ptrs>, i32 <alignment>, <2 x i1>  <mask>, <2 x double> <passthru>)
      declare <8 x ptr> @llvm.masked.gather.v8p0.v8p0(<8 x ptr> <ptrs>, i32 <alignment>, <8 x i1>  <mask>, <8 x ptr> <passthru>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Reads scalar values from arbitrary memory locations and gathers them into one vector. The memory locations are provided in the vector of pointers '``ptrs``'. The memory is accessed according to the provided mask. The mask holds a bit for each vector lane, and is used to prevent memory accesses to the masked-off lanes. The masked-off lanes in the result vector are taken from the corresponding lanes of the '``passthru``' argument.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a vector of pointers which holds all memory addresses to read. The second argument is an alignment of the source addresses. It must be 0 or a power of two constant integer value. The third argument, mask, is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the return type. The fourth is a pass-through value that is used to fill the masked-off lanes of the result. The return type, underlying type of the vector of pointers and the type of the '``passthru``' argument are the same vector types.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.masked.gather``' intrinsic is designed for conditional reading of multiple scalar values from arbitrary memory locations in a single IR operation. It is useful for targets that support vector masked gathers and allows vectorizing basic blocks with data and control divergence. Other targets may support this intrinsic differently, for example by lowering it into a sequence of scalar load operations.
The semantics of this operation are equivalent to a sequence of conditional scalar loads with subsequent gathering all loaded values into a single vector. The mask restricts memory access to certain lanes and facilitates vectorization of predicated basic blocks.


::

       %res = call <4 x double> @llvm.masked.gather.v4f64.v4p0(<4 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 8, <4 x i1> <i1 true, i1 true, i1 true, i1 true>, <4 x double> poison)

       ;; The gather with all-true mask is equivalent to the following instruction sequence
       %ptr0 = extractelement <4 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 0
       %ptr1 = extractelement <4 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 1
       %ptr2 = extractelement <4 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 2
       %ptr3 = extractelement <4 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 3

       %val0 = load double, ptr %ptr0, align 8
       %val1 = load double, ptr %ptr1, align 8
       %val2 = load double, ptr %ptr2, align 8
       %val3 = load double, ptr %ptr3, align 8

       %vec0    = insertelement <4 x double> poison, %val0, 0
       %vec01   = insertelement <4 x double> %vec0, %val1, 1
       %vec012  = insertelement <4 x double> %vec01, %val2, 2
       %vec0123 = insertelement <4 x double> %vec012, %val3, 3

.. _int_mscatter:

'``llvm.masked.scatter.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The data stored in memory is a vector of any integer, floating-point or pointer data type. Each vector element is stored in an arbitrary memory address. Scatter with overlapping addresses is guaranteed to be ordered from least-significant to most-significant element.

::

       declare void @llvm.masked.scatter.v8i32.v8p0  (<8 x i32>    <value>, <8 x ptr>               <ptrs>, i32 <alignment>, <8 x i1>  <mask>)
       declare void @llvm.masked.scatter.v16f32.v16p1(<16 x float> <value>, <16 x ptr addrspace(1)> <ptrs>, i32 <alignment>, <16 x i1> <mask>)
       declare void @llvm.masked.scatter.v4p0.v4p0   (<4 x ptr>    <value>, <4 x ptr>               <ptrs>, i32 <alignment>, <4 x i1>  <mask>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Writes each element from the value vector to the corresponding memory address. The memory addresses are represented as a vector of pointers. Writing is done according to the provided mask. The mask holds a bit for each vector lane, and is used to prevent memory accesses to the masked-off lanes.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a vector value to be written to memory. The second argument is a vector of pointers, pointing to where the value elements should be stored. It has the same underlying type as the value argument. The third argument is an alignment of the destination addresses. It must be 0 or a power of two constant integer value. The fourth argument, mask, is a vector of boolean values. The types of the mask and the value argument must have the same number of vector elements.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.masked.scatter``' intrinsics is designed for writing selected vector elements to arbitrary memory addresses in a single IR operation. The operation may be conditional, when not all bits in the mask are switched on. It is useful for targets that support vector masked scatter and allows vectorizing basic blocks with data and control divergence. Other targets may support this intrinsic differently, for example by lowering it into a sequence of branches that guard scalar store operations.

::

       ;; This instruction unconditionally stores data vector in multiple addresses
       call @llvm.masked.scatter.v8i32.v8p0(<8 x i32> %value, <8 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 4,  <8 x i1>  <true, true, .. true>)

       ;; It is equivalent to a list of scalar stores
       %val0 = extractelement <8 x i32> %value, i32 0
       %val1 = extractelement <8 x i32> %value, i32 1
       ..
       %val7 = extractelement <8 x i32> %value, i32 7
       %ptr0 = extractelement <8 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 0
       %ptr1 = extractelement <8 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 1
       ..
       %ptr7 = extractelement <8 x ptr> %ptrs, i32 7
       ;; Note: the order of the following stores is important when they overlap:
       store i32 %val0, ptr %ptr0, align 4
       store i32 %val1, ptr %ptr1, align 4
       ..
       store i32 %val7, ptr %ptr7, align 4


Masked Vector Expanding Load and Compressing Store Intrinsics
-------------------------------------------------------------

LLVM provides intrinsics for expanding load and compressing store operations. Data selected from a vector according to a mask is stored in consecutive memory addresses (compressed store), and vice-versa (expanding load). These operations effective map to "if (cond.i) a[j++] = v.i" and "if (cond.i) v.i = a[j++]" patterns, respectively. Note that when the mask starts with '1' bits followed by '0' bits, these operations are identical to :ref:`llvm.masked.store <int_mstore>` and :ref:`llvm.masked.load <int_mload>`.

.. _int_expandload:

'``llvm.masked.expandload.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. Several values of integer, floating point or pointer data type are loaded from consecutive memory addresses and stored into the elements of a vector according to the mask.

::

      declare <16 x float>  @llvm.masked.expandload.v16f32 (ptr <ptr>, <16 x i1> <mask>, <16 x float> <passthru>)
      declare <2 x i64>     @llvm.masked.expandload.v2i64 (ptr <ptr>, <2 x i1>  <mask>, <2 x i64> <passthru>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Reads a number of scalar values sequentially from memory location provided in '``ptr``' and spreads them in a vector. The '``mask``' holds a bit for each vector lane. The number of elements read from memory is equal to the number of '1' bits in the mask. The loaded elements are positioned in the destination vector according to the sequence of '1' and '0' bits in the mask. E.g., if the mask vector is '10010001', "expandload" reads 3 values from memory addresses ptr, ptr+1, ptr+2 and places them in lanes 0, 3 and 7 accordingly. The masked-off lanes are filled by elements from the corresponding lanes of the '``passthru``' argument.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the base pointer for the load. It has the same underlying type as the element of the returned vector. The second argument, mask, is a vector of boolean values with the same number of elements as the return type. The third is a pass-through value that is used to fill the masked-off lanes of the result. The return type and the type of the '``passthru``' argument have the same vector type.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the first
argument. The pointer alignment defaults to 1.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.masked.expandload``' intrinsic is designed for reading multiple scalar values from adjacent memory addresses into possibly non-adjacent vector lanes. It is useful for targets that support vector expanding loads and allows vectorizing loop with cross-iteration dependency like in the following example:

.. code-block:: c

    // In this loop we load from B and spread the elements into array A.
    double *A, B; int *C;
    for (int i = 0; i < size; ++i) {
      if (C[i] != 0)
        A[i] = B[j++];
    }


.. code-block:: llvm

    ; Load several elements from array B and expand them in a vector.
    ; The number of loaded elements is equal to the number of '1' elements in the Mask.
    %Tmp = call <8 x double> @llvm.masked.expandload.v8f64(ptr %Bptr, <8 x i1> %Mask, <8 x double> poison)
    ; Store the result in A
    call void @llvm.masked.store.v8f64.p0(<8 x double> %Tmp, ptr %Aptr, i32 8, <8 x i1> %Mask)

    ; %Bptr should be increased on each iteration according to the number of '1' elements in the Mask.
    %MaskI = bitcast <8 x i1> %Mask to i8
    %MaskIPopcnt = call i8 @llvm.ctpop.i8(i8 %MaskI)
    %MaskI64 = zext i8 %MaskIPopcnt to i64
    %BNextInd = add i64 %BInd, %MaskI64


Other targets may support this intrinsic differently, for example, by lowering it into a sequence of conditional scalar load operations and shuffles.
If all mask elements are '1', the intrinsic behavior is equivalent to the regular unmasked vector load.

.. _int_compressstore:

'``llvm.masked.compressstore.*``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. A number of scalar values of integer, floating point or pointer data type are collected from an input vector and stored into adjacent memory addresses. A mask defines which elements to collect from the vector.

::

      declare void @llvm.masked.compressstore.v8i32  (<8  x i32>   <value>, ptr <ptr>, <8  x i1> <mask>)
      declare void @llvm.masked.compressstore.v16f32 (<16 x float> <value>, ptr <ptr>, <16 x i1> <mask>)

Overview:
"""""""""

Selects elements from input vector '``value``' according to the '``mask``'. All selected elements are written into adjacent memory addresses starting at address '`ptr`', from lower to higher. The mask holds a bit for each vector lane, and is used to select elements to be stored. The number of elements to be stored is equal to the number of active bits in the mask.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the input vector, from which elements are collected and written to memory. The second argument is the base pointer for the store, it has the same underlying type as the element of the input vector argument. The third argument is the mask, a vector of boolean values. The mask and the input vector must have the same number of vector elements.

The :ref:`align <attr_align>` parameter attribute can be provided for the second
argument. The pointer alignment defaults to 1.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.masked.compressstore``' intrinsic is designed for compressing data in memory. It allows to collect elements from possibly non-adjacent lanes of a vector and store them contiguously in memory in one IR operation. It is useful for targets that support compressing store operations and allows vectorizing loops with cross-iteration dependencies like in the following example:

.. code-block:: c

    // In this loop we load elements from A and store them consecutively in B
    double *A, B; int *C;
    for (int i = 0; i < size; ++i) {
      if (C[i] != 0)
        B[j++] = A[i]
    }


.. code-block:: llvm

    ; Load elements from A.
    %Tmp = call <8 x double> @llvm.masked.load.v8f64.p0(ptr %Aptr, i32 8, <8 x i1> %Mask, <8 x double> poison)
    ; Store all selected elements consecutively in array B
    call <void> @llvm.masked.compressstore.v8f64(<8 x double> %Tmp, ptr %Bptr, <8 x i1> %Mask)

    ; %Bptr should be increased on each iteration according to the number of '1' elements in the Mask.
    %MaskI = bitcast <8 x i1> %Mask to i8
    %MaskIPopcnt = call i8 @llvm.ctpop.i8(i8 %MaskI)
    %MaskI64 = zext i8 %MaskIPopcnt to i64
    %BNextInd = add i64 %BInd, %MaskI64


Other targets may support this intrinsic differently, for example, by lowering it into a sequence of branches that guard scalar store operations.


Memory Use Markers
------------------

This class of intrinsics provides information about the
:ref:`lifetime of memory objects <objectlifetime>` and ranges where variables
are immutable.

.. _int_lifestart:

'``llvm.lifetime.start``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.lifetime.start(i64 <size>, ptr nocapture <ptr>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.lifetime.start``' intrinsic specifies the start of a memory
object's lifetime.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a constant integer representing the size of the
object, or -1 if it is variable sized. The second argument is a pointer
to the object.

Semantics:
""""""""""

If ``ptr`` is a stack-allocated object and it points to the first byte of
the object, the object is initially marked as dead.
``ptr`` is conservatively considered as a non-stack-allocated object if
the stack coloring algorithm that is used in the optimization pipeline cannot
conclude that ``ptr`` is a stack-allocated object.

After '``llvm.lifetime.start``', the stack object that ``ptr`` points is marked
as alive and has an uninitialized value.
The stack object is marked as dead when either
:ref:`llvm.lifetime.end <int_lifeend>` to the alloca is executed or the
function returns.

After :ref:`llvm.lifetime.end <int_lifeend>` is called,
'``llvm.lifetime.start``' on the stack object can be called again.
The second '``llvm.lifetime.start``' call marks the object as alive, but it
does not change the address of the object.

If ``ptr`` is a non-stack-allocated object, it does not point to the first
byte of the object or it is a stack object that is already alive, it simply
fills all bytes of the object with ``poison``.


.. _int_lifeend:

'``llvm.lifetime.end``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.lifetime.end(i64 <size>, ptr nocapture <ptr>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.lifetime.end``' intrinsic specifies the end of a memory object's
lifetime.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a constant integer representing the size of the
object, or -1 if it is variable sized. The second argument is a pointer
to the object.

Semantics:
""""""""""

If ``ptr`` is a stack-allocated object and it points to the first byte of the
object, the object is dead.
``ptr`` is conservatively considered as a non-stack-allocated object if
the stack coloring algorithm that is used in the optimization pipeline cannot
conclude that ``ptr`` is a stack-allocated object.

Calling ``llvm.lifetime.end`` on an already dead alloca is no-op.

If ``ptr`` is a non-stack-allocated object or it does not point to the first
byte of the object, it is equivalent to simply filling all bytes of the object
with ``poison``.


'``llvm.invariant.start``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The memory object can belong to any address space.

::

      declare ptr @llvm.invariant.start.p0(i64 <size>, ptr nocapture <ptr>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.invariant.start``' intrinsic specifies that the contents of
a memory object will not change.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a constant integer representing the size of the
object, or -1 if it is variable sized. The second argument is a pointer
to the object.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic indicates that until an ``llvm.invariant.end`` that uses
the return value, the referenced memory location is constant and
unchanging.

'``llvm.invariant.end``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The memory object can belong to any address space.

::

      declare void @llvm.invariant.end.p0(ptr <start>, i64 <size>, ptr nocapture <ptr>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.invariant.end``' intrinsic specifies that the contents of a
memory object are mutable.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is the matching ``llvm.invariant.start`` intrinsic.
The second argument is a constant integer representing the size of the
object, or -1 if it is variable sized and the third argument is a
pointer to the object.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic indicates that the memory is mutable again.

'``llvm.launder.invariant.group``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The memory object can belong to any address
space. The returned pointer must belong to the same address space as the
argument.

::

      declare ptr @llvm.launder.invariant.group.p0(ptr <ptr>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.launder.invariant.group``' intrinsic can be used when an invariant
established by ``invariant.group`` metadata no longer holds, to obtain a new
pointer value that carries fresh invariant group information. It is an
experimental intrinsic, which means that its semantics might change in the
future.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.launder.invariant.group`` takes only one argument, which is a pointer
to the memory.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Returns another pointer that aliases its argument but which is considered different
for the purposes of ``load``/``store`` ``invariant.group`` metadata.
It does not read any accessible memory and the execution can be speculated.

'``llvm.strip.invariant.group``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
This is an overloaded intrinsic. The memory object can belong to any address
space. The returned pointer must belong to the same address space as the
argument.

::

      declare ptr @llvm.strip.invariant.group.p0(ptr <ptr>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.strip.invariant.group``' intrinsic can be used when an invariant
established by ``invariant.group`` metadata no longer holds, to obtain a new pointer
value that does not carry the invariant information. It is an experimental
intrinsic, which means that its semantics might change in the future.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.strip.invariant.group`` takes only one argument, which is a pointer
to the memory.

Semantics:
""""""""""

Returns another pointer that aliases its argument but which has no associated
``invariant.group`` metadata.
It does not read any memory and can be speculated.



.. _constrainedfp:

Constrained Floating-Point Intrinsics
-------------------------------------

These intrinsics are used to provide special handling of floating-point
operations when specific rounding mode or floating-point exception behavior is
required.  By default, LLVM optimization passes assume that the rounding mode is
round-to-nearest and that floating-point exceptions will not be monitored.
Constrained FP intrinsics are used to support non-default rounding modes and
accurately preserve exception behavior without compromising LLVM's ability to
optimize FP code when the default behavior is used.

If any FP operation in a function is constrained then they all must be
constrained. This is required for correct LLVM IR. Optimizations that
move code around can create miscompiles if mixing of constrained and normal
operations is done. The correct way to mix constrained and less constrained
operations is to use the rounding mode and exception handling metadata to
mark constrained intrinsics as having LLVM's default behavior.

Each of these intrinsics corresponds to a normal floating-point operation. The
data arguments and the return value are the same as the corresponding FP
operation.

The rounding mode argument is a metadata string specifying what
assumptions, if any, the optimizer can make when transforming constant
values. Some constrained FP intrinsics omit this argument. If required
by the intrinsic, this argument must be one of the following strings:

::

      "round.dynamic"
      "round.tonearest"
      "round.downward"
      "round.upward"
      "round.towardzero"
      "round.tonearestaway"

If this argument is "round.dynamic" optimization passes must assume that the
rounding mode is unknown and may change at runtime.  No transformations that
depend on rounding mode may be performed in this case.

The other possible values for the rounding mode argument correspond to the
similarly named IEEE rounding modes.  If the argument is any of these values
optimization passes may perform transformations as long as they are consistent
with the specified rounding mode.

For example, 'x-0'->'x' is not a valid transformation if the rounding mode is
"round.downward" or "round.dynamic" because if the value of 'x' is +0 then
'x-0' should evaluate to '-0' when rounding downward.  However, this
transformation is legal for all other rounding modes.

For values other than "round.dynamic" optimization passes may assume that the
actual runtime rounding mode (as defined in a target-specific manner) matches
the specified rounding mode, but this is not guaranteed.  Using a specific
non-dynamic rounding mode which does not match the actual rounding mode at
runtime results in undefined behavior.

The exception behavior argument is a metadata string describing the floating
point exception semantics that required for the intrinsic. This argument
must be one of the following strings:

::

      "fpexcept.ignore"
      "fpexcept.maytrap"
      "fpexcept.strict"

If this argument is "fpexcept.ignore" optimization passes may assume that the
exception status flags will not be read and that floating-point exceptions will
be masked.  This allows transformations to be performed that may change the
exception semantics of the original code.  For example, FP operations may be
speculatively executed in this case whereas they must not be for either of the
other possible values of this argument.

If the exception behavior argument is "fpexcept.maytrap" optimization passes
must avoid transformations that may raise exceptions that would not have been
raised by the original code (such as speculatively executing FP operations), but
passes are not required to preserve all exceptions that are implied by the
original code.  For example, exceptions may be potentially hidden by constant
folding.

If the exception behavior argument is "fpexcept.strict" all transformations must
strictly preserve the floating-point exception semantics of the original code.
Any FP exception that would have been raised by the original code must be raised
by the transformed code, and the transformed code must not raise any FP
exceptions that would not have been raised by the original code.  This is the
exception behavior argument that will be used if the code being compiled reads
the FP exception status flags, but this mode can also be used with code that
unmasks FP exceptions.

The number and order of floating-point exceptions is NOT guaranteed.  For
example, a series of FP operations that each may raise exceptions may be
vectorized into a single instruction that raises each unique exception a single
time.

Proper :ref:`function attributes <fnattrs>` usage is required for the
constrained intrinsics to function correctly.

All function *calls* done in a function that uses constrained floating
point intrinsics must have the ``strictfp`` attribute either on the
calling instruction or on the declaration or definition of the function
being called.

All function *definitions* that use constrained floating point intrinsics
must have the ``strictfp`` attribute.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fadd``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fadd(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fadd``' intrinsic returns the sum of its
two arguments.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fadd``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>`
of floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point sum of the two value arguments and has
the same type as the arguments.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fsub``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fsub(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fsub``' intrinsic returns the difference
of its two arguments.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fsub``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>`
of floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point difference of the two value arguments
and has the same type as the arguments.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fmul``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fmul(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fmul``' intrinsic returns the product of
its two arguments.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fmul``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>`
of floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point product of the two value arguments and
has the same type as the arguments.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fdiv``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fdiv(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fdiv``' intrinsic returns the quotient of
its two arguments.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fdiv``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>`
of floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point quotient of the two value arguments and
has the same type as the arguments.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.frem``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.frem(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.frem``' intrinsic returns the remainder
from the division of its two arguments.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.frem``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>`
of floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.  The rounding mode argument has no effect, since
the result of frem is never rounded, but the argument is included for
consistency with the other constrained floating-point intrinsics.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The value produced is the floating-point remainder from the division of the two
value arguments and has the same type as the arguments.  The remainder has the
same sign as the dividend.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fma``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fma(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>, <type> <op3>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fma``' intrinsic returns the result of a
fused-multiply-add operation on its arguments.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fma``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector
<t_vector>` of floating-point values. All arguments must have identical types.

The fourth and fifth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception behavior
as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result produced is the product of the first two arguments added to the third
argument computed with infinite precision, and then rounded to the target
precision.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptoui``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fptoui(<type> <value>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptoui``' intrinsic converts a
floating-point ``value`` to its unsigned integer equivalent of type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptoui``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector
<t_vector>` of floating point values.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result produced is an unsigned integer converted from the floating
point argument. The value is truncated, so it is rounded towards zero.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptosi``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fptosi(<type> <value>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptosi``' intrinsic converts
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` ``value`` to type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptosi``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector
<t_vector>` of floating point values.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result produced is a signed integer converted from the floating
point argument. The value is truncated, so it is rounded towards zero.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.uitofp``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.uitofp(<type> <value>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.uitofp``' intrinsic converts an
unsigned integer ``value`` to a floating-point of type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.uitofp``'
intrinsic must be an :ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector
<t_vector>` of integer values.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

An inexact floating-point exception will be raised if rounding is required.
Any result produced is a floating point value converted from the input
integer argument.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.sitofp``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.sitofp(<type> <value>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.sitofp``' intrinsic converts a
signed integer ``value`` to a floating-point of type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.sitofp``'
intrinsic must be an :ref:`integer <t_integer>` or :ref:`vector
<t_vector>` of integer values.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

An inexact floating-point exception will be raised if rounding is required.
Any result produced is a floating point value converted from the input
integer argument.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptrunc``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fptrunc(<type> <value>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptrunc``' intrinsic truncates ``value``
to type ``ty2``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fptrunc``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector
<t_vector>` of floating point values. This argument must be larger in size
than the result.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result produced is a floating point value truncated to be smaller in size
than the argument.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fpext``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fpext(<type> <value>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fpext``' intrinsic extends a
floating-point ``value`` to a larger floating-point value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fpext``'
intrinsic must be :ref:`floating point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector
<t_vector>` of floating point values. This argument must be smaller in size
than the result.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result produced is a floating point value extended to be larger in size
than the argument. All restrictions that apply to the fpext instruction also
apply to this intrinsic.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmp``' and '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmps``' Intrinsics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmp(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                          metadata <condition code>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)
      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmps(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                           metadata <condition code>,
                                           metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmp``' and
'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmps``' intrinsics return a boolean
value or vector of boolean values based on comparison of its arguments.

If the arguments are floating-point scalars, then the result type is a
boolean (:ref:`i1 <t_integer>`).

If the arguments are floating-point vectors, then the result type is a
vector of boolean with the same number of elements as the arguments being
compared.

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmp``' intrinsic performs a quiet
comparison operation while the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmps``'
intrinsic performs a signaling comparison operation.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmp``'
and '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmps``' intrinsics must be
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>`
of floating-point values. Both arguments must have identical types.

The third argument is the condition code indicating the kind of comparison
to perform. It must be a metadata string with one of the following values:

.. _fcmp_md_cc:

- "``oeq``": ordered and equal
- "``ogt``": ordered and greater than
- "``oge``": ordered and greater than or equal
- "``olt``": ordered and less than
- "``ole``": ordered and less than or equal
- "``one``": ordered and not equal
- "``ord``": ordered (no nans)
- "``ueq``": unordered or equal
- "``ugt``": unordered or greater than
- "``uge``": unordered or greater than or equal
- "``ult``": unordered or less than
- "``ule``": unordered or less than or equal
- "``une``": unordered or not equal
- "``uno``": unordered (either nans)

*Ordered* means that neither argument is a NAN while *unordered* means
that either argument may be a NAN.

The fourth argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

``op1`` and ``op2`` are compared according to the condition code given
as the third argument. If the arguments are vectors, then the
vectors are compared element by element. Each comparison performed
always yields an :ref:`i1 <t_integer>` result, as follows:

.. _fcmp_md_cc_sem:

- "``oeq``": yields ``true`` if both arguments are not a NAN and ``op1``
  is equal to ``op2``.
- "``ogt``": yields ``true`` if both arguments are not a NAN and ``op1``
  is greater than ``op2``.
- "``oge``": yields ``true`` if both arguments are not a NAN and ``op1``
  is greater than or equal to ``op2``.
- "``olt``": yields ``true`` if both arguments are not a NAN and ``op1``
  is less than ``op2``.
- "``ole``": yields ``true`` if both arguments are not a NAN and ``op1``
  is less than or equal to ``op2``.
- "``one``": yields ``true`` if both arguments are not a NAN and ``op1``
  is not equal to ``op2``.
- "``ord``": yields ``true`` if both arguments are not a NAN.
- "``ueq``": yields ``true`` if either argument is a NAN or ``op1`` is
  equal to ``op2``.
- "``ugt``": yields ``true`` if either argument is a NAN or ``op1`` is
  greater than ``op2``.
- "``uge``": yields ``true`` if either argument is a NAN or ``op1`` is
  greater than or equal to ``op2``.
- "``ult``": yields ``true`` if either argument is a NAN or ``op1`` is
  less than ``op2``.
- "``ule``": yields ``true`` if either argument is a NAN or ``op1`` is
  less than or equal to ``op2``.
- "``une``": yields ``true`` if either argument is a NAN or ``op1`` is
  not equal to ``op2``.
- "``uno``": yields ``true`` if either argument is a NAN.

The quiet comparison operation performed by
'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmp``' will only raise an exception
if either argument is a SNAN.  The signaling comparison operation
performed by '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmps``' will raise an
exception if either argument is a NAN (QNAN or SNAN). Such an exception
does not preclude a result being produced (e.g. exception might only
set a flag), therefore the distinction between ordered and unordered
comparisons is also relevant for the
'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fcmps``' intrinsic.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.fmuladd``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.fmuladd(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                             <type> <op3>,
                                             metadata <rounding mode>,
                                             metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fmuladd``' intrinsic represents
multiply-add expressions that can be fused if the code generator determines
that (a) the target instruction set has support for a fused operation,
and (b) that the fused operation is more efficient than the equivalent,
separate pair of mul and add instructions.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments to the '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fmuladd``'
intrinsic must be floating-point or vector of floating-point values.
All three arguments must have identical types.

The fourth and fifth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception behavior
as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The expression:

::

      %0 = call float @llvm.experimental.constrained.fmuladd.f32(%a, %b, %c,
                                                                 metadata <rounding mode>,
                                                                 metadata <exception behavior>)

is equivalent to the expression:

::

      %0 = call float @llvm.experimental.constrained.fmul.f32(%a, %b,
                                                              metadata <rounding mode>,
                                                              metadata <exception behavior>)
      %1 = call float @llvm.experimental.constrained.fadd.f32(%0, %c,
                                                              metadata <rounding mode>,
                                                              metadata <exception behavior>)

except that it is unspecified whether rounding will be performed between the
multiplication and addition steps. Fusion is not guaranteed, even if the target
platform supports it.
If a fused multiply-add is required, the corresponding
:ref:`llvm.experimental.constrained.fma <int_fma>` intrinsic function should be
used instead.
This never sets errno, just as '``llvm.experimental.constrained.fma.*``'.

Constrained libm-equivalent Intrinsics
--------------------------------------

In addition to the basic floating-point operations for which constrained
intrinsics are described above, there are constrained versions of various
operations which provide equivalent behavior to a corresponding libm function.
These intrinsics allow the precise behavior of these operations with respect to
rounding mode and exception behavior to be controlled.

As with the basic constrained floating-point intrinsics, the rounding mode
and exception behavior arguments only control the behavior of the optimizer.
They do not change the runtime floating-point environment.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.sqrt``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.sqrt(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.sqrt``' intrinsic returns the square root
of the specified value, returning the same value as the libm '``sqrt``'
functions would, but without setting ``errno``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the nonnegative square root of the specified value.
If the value is less than negative zero, a floating-point exception occurs
and the return value is architecture specific.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.pow``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.pow(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>,
                                         metadata <rounding mode>,
                                         metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.pow``' intrinsic returns the first argument
raised to the (positive or negative) power specified by the second argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the return value are floating-point numbers of the
same type.  The second argument specifies the power to which the first argument
should be raised.

The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the first value raised to the second power,
returning the same values as the libm ``pow`` functions would, and
handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.powi``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.powi(<type> <op1>, i32 <op2>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.powi``' intrinsic returns the first argument
raised to the (positive or negative) power specified by the second argument. The
order of evaluation of multiplications is not defined. When a vector of
floating-point type is used, the second argument remains a scalar integer value.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.  The second argument is a 32-bit signed integer specifying the power to
which the first argument should be raised.

The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the first value raised to the second power with an
unspecified sequence of rounding operations.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.ldexp``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type0>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.ldexp(<type0> <op1>, <type1> <op2>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.ldexp``' performs the ldexp function.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>` of floating-point values of
the same type. The second argument is an integer with the same number
of elements.


The third and fourth arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function multiplies the first argument by 2 raised to the second
argument's power. If the first argument is NaN or infinite, the same
value is returned. If the result underflows a zero with the same sign
is returned. If the result overflows, the result is an infinity with
the same sign.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.sin``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.sin(<type> <op1>,
                                         metadata <rounding mode>,
                                         metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.sin``' intrinsic returns the sine of the
first argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the sine of the specified argument, returning the
same values as the libm ``sin`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.cos``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.cos(<type> <op1>,
                                         metadata <rounding mode>,
                                         metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.cos``' intrinsic returns the cosine of the
first argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the cosine of the specified argument, returning the
same values as the libm ``cos`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.tan``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.tan(<type> <op1>,
                                         metadata <rounding mode>,
                                         metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.tan``' intrinsic returns the tangent of the
first argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the tangent of the specified argument, returning the
same values as the libm ``tan`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.asin``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.asin(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.asin``' intrinsic returns the arcsine of the
first operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the arcsine of the specified operand, returning the
same values as the libm ``asin`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.acos``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.acos(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.acos``' intrinsic returns the arccosine of the
first operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the arccosine of the specified operand, returning the
same values as the libm ``acos`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.atan``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.atan(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.atan``' intrinsic returns the arctangent of the
first operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the arctangent of the specified operand, returning the
same values as the libm ``atan`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.sinh``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.sinh(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.sinh``' intrinsic returns the hyperbolic sine of the
first operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the hyperbolic sine of the specified operand, returning the
same values as the libm ``sinh`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.cosh``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.cosh(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.cosh``' intrinsic returns the hyperbolic cosine of the
first operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the hyperbolic cosine of the specified operand, returning the
same values as the libm ``cosh`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.tanh``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.tanh(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.tanh``' intrinsic returns the hyperbolic tangent of the
first operand.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return type are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the hyperbolic tangent of the specified operand, returning the
same values as the libm ``tanh`` functions would, and handles error
conditions in the same way.

'``llvm.experimental.constrained.exp``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.exp(<type> <op1>,
                                         metadata <rounding mode>,
                                         metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.exp``' intrinsic computes the base-e
exponential of the specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``exp`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.exp2``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.exp2(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.exp2``' intrinsic computes the base-2
exponential of the specified value.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``exp2`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.log``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.log(<type> <op1>,
                                         metadata <rounding mode>,
                                         metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.log``' intrinsic computes the base-e
logarithm of the specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.


Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``log`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.log10``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.log10(<type> <op1>,
                                           metadata <rounding mode>,
                                           metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.log10``' intrinsic computes the base-10
logarithm of the specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``log10`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.log2``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.log2(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.log2``' intrinsic computes the base-2
logarithm of the specified value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``log2`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.rint``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.rint(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <rounding mode>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.rint``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer. It may raise an inexact floating-point
exception if the argument is not an integer.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``rint`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.  The rounding mode is
described, not determined, by the rounding mode argument.  The actual rounding
mode is determined by the runtime floating-point environment.  The rounding
mode argument is only intended as information to the compiler.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.lrint``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <inttype>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.lrint(<fptype> <op1>,
                                           metadata <rounding mode>,
                                           metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.lrint``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer. An inexact floating-point exception
will be raised if the argument is not an integer. An invalid exception is
raised if the result is too large to fit into a supported integer type,
and in this case the result is undefined.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a floating-point number. The return value is an
integer type. Not all types are supported on all targets. The supported
types are the same as the ``llvm.lrint`` intrinsic and the ``lrint``
libm functions.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``lrint`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.

The rounding mode is described, not determined, by the rounding mode
argument.  The actual rounding mode is determined by the runtime floating-point
environment.  The rounding mode argument is only intended as information
to the compiler.

If the runtime floating-point environment is using the default rounding mode
then the results will be the same as the llvm.lrint intrinsic.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.llrint``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <inttype>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.llrint(<fptype> <op1>,
                                            metadata <rounding mode>,
                                            metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.llrint``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer. An inexact floating-point exception
will be raised if the argument is not an integer. An invalid exception is
raised if the result is too large to fit into a supported integer type,
and in this case the result is undefined.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a floating-point number. The return value is an
integer type. Not all types are supported on all targets. The supported
types are the same as the ``llvm.llrint`` intrinsic and the ``llrint``
libm functions.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``llrint`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.

The rounding mode is described, not determined, by the rounding mode
argument.  The actual rounding mode is determined by the runtime floating-point
environment.  The rounding mode argument is only intended as information
to the compiler.

If the runtime floating-point environment is using the default rounding mode
then the results will be the same as the llvm.llrint intrinsic.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.nearbyint``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.nearbyint(<type> <op1>,
                                               metadata <rounding mode>,
                                               metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.nearbyint``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer. It will not raise an inexact
floating-point exception if the argument is not an integer.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second and third arguments specify the rounding mode and exception
behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``nearbyint`` functions
would, and handles error conditions in the same way.  The rounding mode is
described, not determined, by the rounding mode argument.  The actual rounding
mode is determined by the runtime floating-point environment.  The rounding
mode argument is only intended as information to the compiler.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.maxnum``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.maxnum(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>
                                            metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.maxnum``' intrinsic returns the maximum
of the two arguments.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the return value are floating-point numbers
of the same type.

The third argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function follows the IEEE-754 semantics for maxNum.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.minnum``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.minnum(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>
                                            metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.minnum``' intrinsic returns the minimum
of the two arguments.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the return value are floating-point numbers
of the same type.

The third argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function follows the IEEE-754 semantics for minNum.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.maximum``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.maximum(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>
                                             metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.maximum``' intrinsic returns the maximum
of the two arguments, propagating NaNs and treating -0.0 as less than +0.0.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the return value are floating-point numbers
of the same type.

The third argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function follows semantics specified in the draft of IEEE 754-2019.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.minimum``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.minimum(<type> <op1>, <type> <op2>
                                             metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.minimum``' intrinsic returns the minimum
of the two arguments, propagating NaNs and treating -0.0 as less than +0.0.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first two arguments and the return value are floating-point numbers
of the same type.

The third argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function follows semantics specified in the draft of IEEE 754-2019.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.ceil``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.ceil(<type> <op1>,
                                          metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.ceil``' intrinsic returns the ceiling of the
first argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``ceil`` functions
would and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.floor``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.floor(<type> <op1>,
                                           metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.floor``' intrinsic returns the floor of the
first argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``floor`` functions
would and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.round``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.round(<type> <op1>,
                                           metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.round``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``round`` functions
would and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.roundeven``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.roundeven(<type> <op1>,
                                               metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.roundeven``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer in floating-point format, rounding
halfway cases to even (that is, to the nearest value that is an even integer),
regardless of the current rounding direction.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function implements IEEE-754 operation ``roundToIntegralTiesToEven``. It
also behaves in the same way as C standard function ``roundeven`` and can signal
the invalid operation exception for a SNAN argument.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.lround``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <inttype>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.lround(<fptype> <op1>,
                                            metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.lround``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer with ties away from zero.  It will
raise an inexact floating-point exception if the argument is not an integer.
An invalid exception is raised if the result is too large to fit into a
supported integer type, and in this case the result is undefined.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a floating-point number. The return value is an
integer type. Not all types are supported on all targets. The supported
types are the same as the ``llvm.lround`` intrinsic and the ``lround``
libm functions.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``lround`` functions
would and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.llround``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <inttype>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.llround(<fptype> <op1>,
                                             metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.llround``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer with ties away from zero. It will
raise an inexact floating-point exception if the argument is not an integer.
An invalid exception is raised if the result is too large to fit into a
supported integer type, and in this case the result is undefined.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a floating-point number. The return value is an
integer type. Not all types are supported on all targets. The supported
types are the same as the ``llvm.llround`` intrinsic and the ``llround``
libm functions.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``llround`` functions
would and handles error conditions in the same way.


'``llvm.experimental.constrained.trunc``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.experimental.constrained.trunc(<type> <op1>,
                                           metadata <exception behavior>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.experimental.constrained.trunc``' intrinsic returns the first
argument rounded to the nearest integer not larger in magnitude than the
argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument and the return value are floating-point numbers of the same
type.

The second argument specifies the exception behavior as described above.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This function returns the same values as the libm ``trunc`` functions
would and handles error conditions in the same way.

.. _int_experimental_noalias_scope_decl:

'``llvm.experimental.noalias.scope.decl``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""


::

      declare void @llvm.experimental.noalias.scope.decl(metadata !id.scope.list)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.experimental.noalias.scope.decl`` intrinsic identifies where a
noalias scope is declared. When the intrinsic is duplicated, a decision must
also be made about the scope: depending on the reason of the duplication,
the scope might need to be duplicated as well.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``!id.scope.list`` argument is metadata that is a list of ``noalias``
metadata references. The format is identical to that required for ``noalias``
metadata. This list must have exactly one element.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.experimental.noalias.scope.decl`` intrinsic identifies where a
noalias scope is declared. When the intrinsic is duplicated, a decision must
also be made about the scope: depending on the reason of the duplication,
the scope might need to be duplicated as well.

For example, when the intrinsic is used inside a loop body, and that loop is
unrolled, the associated noalias scope must also be duplicated. Otherwise, the
noalias property it signifies would spill across loop iterations, whereas it
was only valid within a single iteration.

.. code-block:: llvm

  ; This examples shows two possible positions for noalias.decl and how they impact the semantics:
  ; If it is outside the loop (Version 1), then %a and %b are noalias across *all* iterations.
  ; If it is inside the loop (Version 2), then %a and %b are noalias only within *one* iteration.
  declare void @decl_in_loop(ptr %a.base, ptr %b.base) {
  entry:
    ; call void @llvm.experimental.noalias.scope.decl(metadata !2) ; Version 1: noalias decl outside loop
    br label %loop

  loop:
    %a = phi ptr [ %a.base, %entry ], [ %a.inc, %loop ]
    %b = phi ptr [ %b.base, %entry ], [ %b.inc, %loop ]
    ; call void @llvm.experimental.noalias.scope.decl(metadata !2) ; Version 2: noalias decl inside loop
    %val = load i8, ptr %a, !alias.scope !2
    store i8 %val, ptr %b, !noalias !2
    %a.inc = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %a, i64 1
    %b.inc = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %b, i64 1
    %cond = call i1 @cond()
    br i1 %cond, label %loop, label %exit

  exit:
    ret void
  }

  !0 = !{!0} ; domain
  !1 = !{!1, !0} ; scope
  !2 = !{!1} ; scope list

Multiple calls to `@llvm.experimental.noalias.scope.decl` for the same scope
are possible, but one should never dominate another. Violations are pointed out
by the verifier as they indicate a problem in either a transformation pass or
the input.


Floating Point Environment Manipulation intrinsics
--------------------------------------------------

These functions read or write floating point environment, such as rounding
mode or state of floating point exceptions. Altering the floating point
environment requires special care. See :ref:`Floating Point Environment <floatenv>`.

.. _int_get_rounding:

'``llvm.get.rounding``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.get.rounding()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.get.rounding``' intrinsic reads the current rounding mode.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.get.rounding``' intrinsic returns the current rounding mode.
Encoding of the returned values is same as the result of ``FLT_ROUNDS``,
specified by C standard:

::

    0  - toward zero
    1  - to nearest, ties to even
    2  - toward positive infinity
    3  - toward negative infinity
    4  - to nearest, ties away from zero

Other values may be used to represent additional rounding modes, supported by a
target. These values are target-specific.

.. _int_set_rounding:

'``llvm.set.rounding``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.set.rounding(i32 <val>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.set.rounding``' intrinsic sets current rounding mode.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is the required rounding mode. Encoding of rounding mode is
the same as used by '``llvm.get.rounding``'.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.set.rounding``' intrinsic sets the current rounding mode. It is
similar to C library function 'fesetround', however this intrinsic does not
return any value and uses platform-independent representation of IEEE rounding
modes.

.. _int_get_fpenv:

'``llvm.get.fpenv``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <integer_type> @llvm.get.fpenv()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.get.fpenv``' intrinsic returns bits of the current floating-point
environment. The return value type is platform-specific.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.get.fpenv``' intrinsic reads the current floating-point environment
and returns it as an integer value.

.. _int_set_fpenv:

'``llvm.set.fpenv``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.set.fpenv(<integer_type> <val>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.set.fpenv``' intrinsic sets the current floating-point environment.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is an integer representing the new floating-point environment. The
integer type is platform-specific.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.set.fpenv``' intrinsic sets the current floating-point environment
to the state specified by the argument. The state may be previously obtained by a
call to '``llvm.get.fpenv``' or synthesized in a platform-dependent way.


'``llvm.reset.fpenv``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.reset.fpenv()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.reset.fpenv``' intrinsic sets the default floating-point environment.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.reset.fpenv``' intrinsic sets the current floating-point environment
to default state. It is similar to the call 'fesetenv(FE_DFL_ENV)', except it
does not return any value.

.. _int_get_fpmode:

'``llvm.get.fpmode``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

The '``llvm.get.fpmode``' intrinsic returns bits of the current floating-point
control modes. The return value type is platform-specific.

::

      declare <integer_type> @llvm.get.fpmode()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.get.fpmode``' intrinsic reads the current dynamic floating-point
control modes and returns it as an integer value.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.get.fpmode``' intrinsic reads the current dynamic floating-point
control modes, such as rounding direction, precision, treatment of denormals and
so on. It is similar to the C library function 'fegetmode', however this
function does not store the set of control modes into memory but returns it as
an integer value. Interpretation of the bits in this value is target-dependent.

'``llvm.set.fpmode``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

The '``llvm.set.fpmode``' intrinsic sets the current floating-point control modes.

::

      declare void @llvm.set.fpmode(<integer_type> <val>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.set.fpmode``' intrinsic sets the current dynamic floating-point
control modes.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument is a set of floating-point control modes, represented as an integer
value in a target-dependent way.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.set.fpmode``' intrinsic sets the current dynamic floating-point
control modes to the state specified by the argument, which must be obtained by
a call to '``llvm.get.fpmode``' or constructed in a target-specific way. It is
similar to the C library function 'fesetmode', however this function does not
read the set of control modes from memory but gets it as integer value.

'``llvm.reset.fpmode``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.reset.fpmode()

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.reset.fpmode``' intrinsic sets the default dynamic floating-point
control modes.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.reset.fpmode``' intrinsic sets the current dynamic floating-point
environment to default state. It is similar to the C library function call
'fesetmode(FE_DFL_MODE)', however this function does not return any value.


Floating-Point Test Intrinsics
------------------------------

These functions get properties of floating-point values.


.. _llvm.is.fpclass:

'``llvm.is.fpclass``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i1 @llvm.is.fpclass(<fptype> <op>, i32 <test>)
      declare <N x i1> @llvm.is.fpclass(<vector-fptype> <op>, i32 <test>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.is.fpclass``' intrinsic returns a boolean value or vector of boolean
values depending on whether the first argument satisfies the test specified by
the second argument.

If the first argument is a floating-point scalar, then the result type is a
boolean (:ref:`i1 <t_integer>`).

If the first argument is a floating-point vector, then the result type is a
vector of boolean with the same number of elements as the first argument.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument to the '``llvm.is.fpclass``' intrinsic must be
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` or :ref:`vector <t_vector>`
of floating-point values.

The second argument specifies, which tests to perform. It must be a compile-time
integer constant, each bit in which specifies floating-point class:

+-------+----------------------+
| Bit # | floating-point class |
+=======+======================+
| 0     | Signaling NaN        |
+-------+----------------------+
| 1     | Quiet NaN            |
+-------+----------------------+
| 2     | Negative infinity    |
+-------+----------------------+
| 3     | Negative normal      |
+-------+----------------------+
| 4     | Negative subnormal   |
+-------+----------------------+
| 5     | Negative zero        |
+-------+----------------------+
| 6     | Positive zero        |
+-------+----------------------+
| 7     | Positive subnormal   |
+-------+----------------------+
| 8     | Positive normal      |
+-------+----------------------+
| 9     | Positive infinity    |
+-------+----------------------+

Semantics:
""""""""""

The function checks if ``op`` belongs to any of the floating-point classes
specified by ``test``. If ``op`` is a vector, then the check is made element by
element. Each check yields an :ref:`i1 <t_integer>` result, which is ``true``,
if the element value satisfies the specified test. The argument ``test`` is a
bit mask where each bit specifies floating-point class to test. For example, the
value 0x108 makes test for normal value, - bits 3 and 8 in it are set, which
means that the function returns ``true`` if ``op`` is a positive or negative
normal value. The function never raises floating-point exceptions. The
function does not canonicalize its input value and does not depend
on the floating-point environment. If the floating-point environment
has a zeroing treatment of subnormal input values (such as indicated
by the ``"denormal-fp-math"`` attribute), a subnormal value will be
observed (will not be implicitly treated as zero).


General Intrinsics
------------------

This class of intrinsics is designed to be generic and has no specific
purpose.

'``llvm.var.annotation``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.var.annotation(ptr <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32  <int>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.var.annotation``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to a value, the second is a pointer to a
global string, the third is a pointer to a global string which is the
source file name, and the last argument is the line number.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic allows annotation of local variables with arbitrary
strings. This can be useful for special purpose optimizations that want
to look for these annotations. These have no other defined use; they are
ignored by code generation and optimization.

'``llvm.ptr.annotation.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use '``llvm.ptr.annotation``' on a
pointer to an integer of any width. *NOTE* you must specify an address space for
the pointer. The identifier for the default address space is the integer
'``0``'.

::

      declare ptr @llvm.ptr.annotation.p0(ptr <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32 <int>)
      declare ptr @llvm.ptr.annotation.p1(ptr addrspace(1) <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32 <int>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ptr.annotation``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to an integer value of arbitrary bitwidth
(result of some expression), the second is a pointer to a global string, the
third is a pointer to a global string which is the source file name, and the
last argument is the line number. It returns the value of the first argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic allows annotation of a pointer to an integer with arbitrary
strings. This can be useful for special purpose optimizations that want to look
for these annotations. These have no other defined use; transformations preserve
annotations on a best-effort basis but are allowed to replace the intrinsic with
its first argument without breaking semantics and the intrinsic is completely
dropped during instruction selection.

'``llvm.annotation.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use '``llvm.annotation``' on
any integer bit width.

::

      declare i8 @llvm.annotation.i8(i8 <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32  <int>)
      declare i16 @llvm.annotation.i16(i16 <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32  <int>)
      declare i32 @llvm.annotation.i32(i32 <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32  <int>)
      declare i64 @llvm.annotation.i64(i64 <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32  <int>)
      declare i256 @llvm.annotation.i256(i256 <val>, ptr <str>, ptr <str>, i32  <int>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.annotation``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is an integer value (result of some expression), the
second is a pointer to a global string, the third is a pointer to a
global string which is the source file name, and the last argument is
the line number. It returns the value of the first argument.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic allows annotations to be put on arbitrary expressions with
arbitrary strings. This can be useful for special purpose optimizations that
want to look for these annotations. These have no other defined use;
transformations preserve annotations on a best-effort basis but are allowed to
replace the intrinsic with its first argument without breaking semantics and the
intrinsic is completely dropped during instruction selection.

'``llvm.codeview.annotation``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This annotation emits a label at its program point and an associated
``S_ANNOTATION`` codeview record with some additional string metadata. This is
used to implement MSVC's ``__annotation`` intrinsic. It is marked
``noduplicate``, so calls to this intrinsic prevent inlining and should be
considered expensive.

::

      declare void @llvm.codeview.annotation(metadata)

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument should be an MDTuple containing any number of MDStrings.

.. _llvm.trap:

'``llvm.trap``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.trap() cold noreturn nounwind

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.trap``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic is lowered to the target dependent trap instruction. If
the target does not have a trap instruction, this intrinsic will be
lowered to a call of the ``abort()`` function.

.. _llvm.debugtrap:

'``llvm.debugtrap``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.debugtrap() nounwind

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.debugtrap``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic is lowered to code which is intended to cause an
execution trap with the intention of requesting the attention of a
debugger.

.. _llvm.ubsantrap:

'``llvm.ubsantrap``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.ubsantrap(i8 immarg) cold noreturn nounwind

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.ubsantrap``' intrinsic.

Arguments:
""""""""""

An integer describing the kind of failure detected.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic is lowered to code which is intended to cause an execution trap,
embedding the argument into encoding of that trap somehow to discriminate
crashes if possible.

Equivalent to ``@llvm.trap`` for targets that do not support this behavior.

'``llvm.stackprotector``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.stackprotector(ptr <guard>, ptr <slot>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.stackprotector`` intrinsic takes the ``guard`` and stores it
onto the stack at ``slot``. The stack slot is adjusted to ensure that it
is placed on the stack before local variables.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.stackprotector`` intrinsic requires two pointer arguments.
The first argument is the value loaded from the stack guard
``@__stack_chk_guard``. The second variable is an ``alloca`` that has
enough space to hold the value of the guard.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic causes the prologue/epilogue inserter to force the position of
the ``AllocaInst`` stack slot to be before local variables on the stack. This is
to ensure that if a local variable on the stack is overwritten, it will destroy
the value of the guard. When the function exits, the guard on the stack is
checked against the original guard by ``llvm.stackprotectorcheck``. If they are
different, then ``llvm.stackprotectorcheck`` causes the program to abort by
calling the ``__stack_chk_fail()`` function.

'``llvm.stackguard``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.stackguard()

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.stackguard`` intrinsic returns the system stack guard value.

It should not be generated by frontends, since it is only for internal usage.
The reason why we create this intrinsic is that we still support IR form Stack
Protector in FastISel.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

On some platforms, the value returned by this intrinsic remains unchanged
between loads in the same thread. On other platforms, it returns the same
global variable value, if any, e.g. ``@__stack_chk_guard``.

Currently some platforms have IR-level customized stack guard loading (e.g.
X86 Linux) that is not handled by ``llvm.stackguard()``, while they should be
in the future.

'``llvm.objectsize``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 @llvm.objectsize.i32(ptr <object>, i1 <min>, i1 <nullunknown>, i1 <dynamic>)
      declare i64 @llvm.objectsize.i64(ptr <object>, i1 <min>, i1 <nullunknown>, i1 <dynamic>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.objectsize`` intrinsic is designed to provide information to the
optimizer to determine whether a) an operation (like memcpy) will overflow a
buffer that corresponds to an object, or b) that a runtime check for overflow
isn't necessary. An object in this context means an allocation of a specific
class, structure, array, or other object.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.objectsize`` intrinsic takes four arguments. The first argument is a
pointer to or into the ``object``. The second argument determines whether
``llvm.objectsize`` returns 0 (if true) or -1 (if false) when the object size is
unknown. The third argument controls how ``llvm.objectsize`` acts when ``null``
in address space 0 is used as its pointer argument. If it's ``false``,
``llvm.objectsize`` reports 0 bytes available when given ``null``. Otherwise, if
the ``null`` is in a non-zero address space or if ``true`` is given for the
third argument of ``llvm.objectsize``, we assume its size is unknown. The fourth
argument to ``llvm.objectsize`` determines if the value should be evaluated at
runtime.

The second, third, and fourth arguments only accept constants.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.objectsize`` intrinsic is lowered to a value representing the size of
the object concerned. If the size cannot be determined, ``llvm.objectsize``
returns ``i32/i64 -1 or 0`` (depending on the ``min`` argument).

'``llvm.expect``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.expect`` on any
integer bit width.

::

      declare i1 @llvm.expect.i1(i1 <val>, i1 <expected_val>)
      declare i32 @llvm.expect.i32(i32 <val>, i32 <expected_val>)
      declare i64 @llvm.expect.i64(i64 <val>, i64 <expected_val>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.expect`` intrinsic provides information about expected (the
most probable) value of ``val``, which can be used by optimizers.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.expect`` intrinsic takes two arguments. The first argument is
a value. The second argument is an expected value.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic is lowered to the ``val``.

'``llvm.expect.with.probability``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This intrinsic is similar to ``llvm.expect``. This is an overloaded intrinsic.
You can use ``llvm.expect.with.probability`` on any integer bit width.

::

      declare i1 @llvm.expect.with.probability.i1(i1 <val>, i1 <expected_val>, double <prob>)
      declare i32 @llvm.expect.with.probability.i32(i32 <val>, i32 <expected_val>, double <prob>)
      declare i64 @llvm.expect.with.probability.i64(i64 <val>, i64 <expected_val>, double <prob>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.expect.with.probability`` intrinsic provides information about
expected value of ``val`` with probability(or confidence) ``prob``, which can
be used by optimizers.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.expect.with.probability`` intrinsic takes three arguments. The first
argument is a value. The second argument is an expected value. The third
argument is a probability.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic is lowered to the ``val``.

.. _int_assume:

'``llvm.assume``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.assume(i1 %cond)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.assume`` allows the optimizer to assume that the provided
condition is true. This information can then be used in simplifying other parts
of the code.

More complex assumptions can be encoded as
:ref:`assume operand bundles <assume_opbundles>`.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The argument of the call is the condition which the optimizer may assume is
always true.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The intrinsic allows the optimizer to assume that the provided condition is
always true whenever the control flow reaches the intrinsic call. No code is
generated for this intrinsic, and instructions that contribute only to the
provided condition are not used for code generation. If the condition is
violated during execution, the behavior is undefined.

Note that the optimizer might limit the transformations performed on values
used by the ``llvm.assume`` intrinsic in order to preserve the instructions
only used to form the intrinsic's input argument. This might prove undesirable
if the extra information provided by the ``llvm.assume`` intrinsic does not cause
sufficient overall improvement in code quality. For this reason,
``llvm.assume`` should not be used to document basic mathematical invariants
that the optimizer can otherwise deduce or facts that are of little use to the
optimizer.

.. _int_ssa_copy:

'``llvm.ssa.copy``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare type @llvm.ssa.copy(type returned %operand) memory(none)

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is an operand which is used as the returned value.

Overview:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.ssa.copy`` intrinsic can be used to attach information to
operations by copying them and giving them new names.  For example,
the PredicateInfo utility uses it to build Extended SSA form, and
attach various forms of information to operands that dominate specific
uses.  It is not meant for general use, only for building temporary
renaming forms that require value splits at certain points.

.. _type.test:

'``llvm.type.test``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i1 @llvm.type.test(ptr %ptr, metadata %type) nounwind memory(none)


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer to be tested. The second argument is a
metadata object representing a :doc:`type identifier <TypeMetadata>`.

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.type.test`` intrinsic tests whether the given pointer is associated
with the given type identifier.

.. _type.checked.load:

'``llvm.type.checked.load``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare {ptr, i1} @llvm.type.checked.load(ptr %ptr, i32 %offset, metadata %type) nounwind memory(argmem: read)


Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer from which to load a function pointer. The
second argument is the byte offset from which to load the function pointer. The
third argument is a metadata object representing a :doc:`type identifier
<TypeMetadata>`.

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.type.checked.load`` intrinsic safely loads a function pointer from a
virtual table pointer using type metadata. This intrinsic is used to implement
control flow integrity in conjunction with virtual call optimization. The
virtual call optimization pass will optimize away ``llvm.type.checked.load``
intrinsics associated with devirtualized calls, thereby removing the type
check in cases where it is not needed to enforce the control flow integrity
constraint.

If the given pointer is associated with a type metadata identifier, this
function returns true as the second element of its return value. (Note that
the function may also return true if the given pointer is not associated
with a type metadata identifier.) If the function's return value's second
element is true, the following rules apply to the first element:

- If the given pointer is associated with the given type metadata identifier,
  it is the function pointer loaded from the given byte offset from the given
  pointer.

- If the given pointer is not associated with the given type metadata
  identifier, it is one of the following (the choice of which is unspecified):

  1. The function pointer that would have been loaded from an arbitrarily chosen
     (through an unspecified mechanism) pointer associated with the type
     metadata.

  2. If the function has a non-void return type, a pointer to a function that
     returns an unspecified value without causing side effects.

If the function's return value's second element is false, the value of the
first element is undefined.

.. _type.checked.load.relative:

'``llvm.type.checked.load.relative``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare {ptr, i1} @llvm.type.checked.load.relative(ptr %ptr, i32 %offset, metadata %type) nounwind memory(argmem: read)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.type.checked.load.relative`` intrinsic loads a relative pointer to a
function from a virtual table pointer using metadata. Otherwise, its semantic is
identical to the ``llvm.type.checked.load`` intrinsic.

A relative pointer is a pointer to an offset to the pointed to value. The
address of the underlying pointer of the relative pointer is obtained by adding
the offset to the address of the offset value.

'``llvm.arithmetic.fence``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.arithmetic.fence(<type> <op>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The purpose of the ``llvm.arithmetic.fence`` intrinsic
is to prevent the optimizer from performing fast-math optimizations,
particularly reassociation,
between the argument and the expression that contains the argument.
It can be used to preserve the parentheses in the source language.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.arithmetic.fence`` intrinsic takes only one argument.
The argument and the return value are floating-point numbers,
or vector floating-point numbers, of the same type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic returns the value of its operand. The optimizer can optimize
the argument, but the optimizer cannot hoist any component of the operand
to the containing context, and the optimizer cannot move the calculation of
any expression in the containing context into the operand.


'``llvm.donothing``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.donothing() nounwind memory(none)

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.donothing`` intrinsic doesn't perform any operation. It's one of only
three intrinsics (besides ``llvm.experimental.patchpoint`` and
``llvm.experimental.gc.statepoint``) that can be called with an invoke
instruction.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic does nothing, and it's removed by optimizers and ignored
by codegen.

'``llvm.experimental.deoptimize``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare type @llvm.experimental.deoptimize(...) [ "deopt"(...) ]

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic, together with :ref:`deoptimization operand bundles
<deopt_opbundles>`, allow frontends to express transfer of control and
frame-local state from the currently executing (typically more specialized,
hence faster) version of a function into another (typically more generic, hence
slower) version.

In languages with a fully integrated managed runtime like Java and JavaScript
this intrinsic can be used to implement "uncommon trap" or "side exit" like
functionality.  In unmanaged languages like C and C++, this intrinsic can be
used to represent the slow paths of specialized functions.


Arguments:
""""""""""

The intrinsic takes an arbitrary number of arguments, whose meaning is
decided by the :ref:`lowering strategy<deoptimize_lowering>`.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The ``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` intrinsic executes an attached
deoptimization continuation (denoted using a :ref:`deoptimization
operand bundle <deopt_opbundles>`) and returns the value returned by
the deoptimization continuation.  Defining the semantic properties of
the continuation itself is out of scope of the language reference --
as far as LLVM is concerned, the deoptimization continuation can
invoke arbitrary side effects, including reading from and writing to
the entire heap.

Deoptimization continuations expressed using ``"deopt"`` operand bundles always
continue execution to the end of the physical frame containing them, so all
calls to ``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` must be in "tail position":

   - ``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` cannot be invoked.
   - The call must immediately precede a :ref:`ret <i_ret>` instruction.
   - The ``ret`` instruction must return the value produced by the
     ``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` call if there is one, or void.

Note that the above restrictions imply that the return type for a call to
``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` will match the return type of its immediate
caller.

The inliner composes the ``"deopt"`` continuations of the caller into the
``"deopt"`` continuations present in the inlinee, and also updates calls to this
intrinsic to return directly from the frame of the function it inlined into.

All declarations of ``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` must share the
same calling convention.

.. _deoptimize_lowering:

Lowering:
"""""""""

Calls to ``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` are lowered to calls to the
symbol ``__llvm_deoptimize`` (it is the frontend's responsibility to
ensure that this symbol is defined).  The call arguments to
``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` are lowered as if they were formal
arguments of the specified types, and not as varargs.


'``llvm.experimental.guard``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.experimental.guard(i1, ...) [ "deopt"(...) ]

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic, together with :ref:`deoptimization operand bundles
<deopt_opbundles>`, allows frontends to express guards or checks on
optimistic assumptions made during compilation.  The semantics of
``@llvm.experimental.guard`` is defined in terms of
``@llvm.experimental.deoptimize`` -- its body is defined to be
equivalent to:

.. code-block:: text

  define void @llvm.experimental.guard(i1 %pred, <args...>) {
    %realPred = and i1 %pred, undef
    br i1 %realPred, label %continue, label %leave [, !make.implicit !{}]

  leave:
    call void @llvm.experimental.deoptimize(<args...>) [ "deopt"() ]
    ret void

  continue:
    ret void
  }


with the optional ``[, !make.implicit !{}]`` present if and only if it
is present on the call site.  For more details on ``!make.implicit``,
see :doc:`FaultMaps`.

In words, ``@llvm.experimental.guard`` executes the attached
``"deopt"`` continuation if (but **not** only if) its first argument
is ``false``.  Since the optimizer is allowed to replace the ``undef``
with an arbitrary value, it can optimize guard to fail "spuriously",
i.e. without the original condition being false (hence the "not only
if"); and this allows for "check widening" type optimizations.

``@llvm.experimental.guard`` cannot be invoked.

After ``@llvm.experimental.guard`` was first added, a more general
formulation was found in ``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition``.
Support for ``@llvm.experimental.guard`` is slowly being rephrased in
terms of this alternate.

'``llvm.experimental.widenable.condition``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i1 @llvm.experimental.widenable.condition()

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic represents a "widenable condition" which is
boolean expressions with the following property: whether this
expression is `true` or `false`, the program is correct and
well-defined.

Together with :ref:`deoptimization operand bundles <deopt_opbundles>`,
``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition`` allows frontends to
express guards or checks on optimistic assumptions made during
compilation and represent them as branch instructions on special
conditions.

While this may appear similar in semantics to `undef`, it is very
different in that an invocation produces a particular, singular
value. It is also intended to be lowered late, and remain available
for specific optimizations and transforms that can benefit from its
special properties.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The intrinsic ``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition()``
returns either `true` or `false`. For each evaluation of a call
to this intrinsic, the program must be valid and correct both if
it returns `true` and if it returns `false`. This allows
transformation passes to replace evaluations of this intrinsic
with either value whenever one is beneficial.

When used in a branch condition, it allows us to choose between
two alternative correct solutions for the same problem, like
in example below:

.. code-block:: text

    %cond = call i1 @llvm.experimental.widenable.condition()
    br i1 %cond, label %fast_path, label %slow_path

  fast_path:
    ; Apply memory-consuming but fast solution for a task.

  slow_path:
    ; Cheap in memory but slow solution.

Whether the result of intrinsic's call is `true` or `false`,
it should be correct to pick either solution. We can switch
between them by replacing the result of
``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition`` with different
`i1` expressions.

This is how it can be used to represent guards as widenable branches:

.. code-block:: text

  block:
    ; Unguarded instructions
    call void @llvm.experimental.guard(i1 %cond, <args...>) ["deopt"(<deopt_args...>)]
    ; Guarded instructions

Can be expressed in an alternative equivalent form of explicit branch using
``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition``:

.. code-block:: text

  block:
    ; Unguarded instructions
    %widenable_condition = call i1 @llvm.experimental.widenable.condition()
    %guard_condition = and i1 %cond, %widenable_condition
    br i1 %guard_condition, label %guarded, label %deopt

  guarded:
    ; Guarded instructions

  deopt:
    call type @llvm.experimental.deoptimize(<args...>) [ "deopt"(<deopt_args...>) ]

So the block `guarded` is only reachable when `%cond` is `true`,
and it should be valid to go to the block `deopt` whenever `%cond`
is `true` or `false`.

``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition`` will never throw, thus
it cannot be invoked.

Guard widening:
"""""""""""""""

When ``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition()`` is used in
condition of a guard represented as explicit branch, it is
legal to widen the guard's condition with any additional
conditions.

Guard widening looks like replacement of

.. code-block:: text

  %widenable_cond = call i1 @llvm.experimental.widenable.condition()
  %guard_cond = and i1 %cond, %widenable_cond
  br i1 %guard_cond, label %guarded, label %deopt

with

.. code-block:: text

  %widenable_cond = call i1 @llvm.experimental.widenable.condition()
  %new_cond = and i1 %any_other_cond, %widenable_cond
  %new_guard_cond = and i1 %cond, %new_cond
  br i1 %new_guard_cond, label %guarded, label %deopt

for this branch. Here `%any_other_cond` is an arbitrarily chosen
well-defined `i1` value. By making guard widening, we may
impose stricter conditions on `guarded` block and bail to the
deopt when the new condition is not met.

Lowering:
"""""""""

Default lowering strategy is replacing the result of
call of ``@llvm.experimental.widenable.condition``  with
constant `true`. However it is always correct to replace
it with any other `i1` value. Any pass can
freely do it if it can benefit from non-default lowering.

'``llvm.allow.ubsan.check``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i1 @llvm.allow.ubsan.check(i8 immarg %kind)

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic returns ``true`` if and only if the compiler opted to enable the
ubsan check in the current basic block.

Rules to allow ubsan checks are not part of the intrinsic declaration, and
controlled by compiler options.

This intrinsic is the ubsan specific version of ``@llvm.allow.runtime.check()``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

An integer describing the kind of ubsan check guarded by the intrinsic.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The intrinsic ``@llvm.allow.ubsan.check()`` returns either ``true`` or
``false``, depending on compiler options. 

For each evaluation of a call to this intrinsic, the program must be valid and
correct both if it returns ``true`` and if it returns ``false``.

When used in a branch condition, it selects one of the two paths:

* `true``: Executes the UBSan check and reports any failures.

* `false`: Bypasses the check, assuming it always succeeds.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    %allow = call i1 @llvm.allow.ubsan.check(i8 5)
    %not.allow = xor i1 %allow, true
    %cond = or i1 %ubcheck, %not.allow
    br i1 %cond, label %cont, label %trap

  cont:
    ; Proceed

  trap:
    call void @llvm.ubsantrap(i8 5)
    unreachable


'``llvm.allow.runtime.check``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i1 @llvm.allow.runtime.check(metadata %kind)

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic returns ``true`` if and only if the compiler opted to enable
runtime checks in the current basic block.

Rules to allow runtime checks are not part of the intrinsic declaration, and
controlled by compiler options.

This intrinsic is non-ubsan specific version of ``@llvm.allow.ubsan.check()``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

A string identifying the kind of runtime check guarded by the intrinsic. The
string can be used to control rules to allow checks.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The intrinsic ``@llvm.allow.runtime.check()`` returns either ``true`` or
``false``, depending on compiler options. 

For each evaluation of a call to this intrinsic, the program must be valid and
correct both if it returns ``true`` and if it returns ``false``.

When used in a branch condition, it allows us to choose between
two alternative correct solutions for the same problem. 

If the intrinsic is evaluated as ``true``, program should execute a guarded
check. If the intrinsic is evaluated as ``false``, the program should avoid any
unnecessary checks.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

    %allow = call i1 @llvm.allow.runtime.check(metadata !"my_check")
    br i1 %allow, label %fast_path, label %slow_path

  fast_path:
    ; Omit diagnostics.

  slow_path:
    ; Additional diagnostics.


'``llvm.load.relative``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.load.relative.iN(ptr %ptr, iN %offset) nounwind memory(argmem: read)

Overview:
"""""""""

This intrinsic loads a 32-bit value from the address ``%ptr + %offset``,
adds ``%ptr`` to that value and returns it. The constant folder specifically
recognizes the form of this intrinsic and the constant initializers it may
load from; if a loaded constant initializer is known to have the form
``i32 trunc(x - %ptr)``, the intrinsic call is folded to ``x``.

LLVM provides that the calculation of such a constant initializer will
not overflow at link time under the medium code model if ``x`` is an
``unnamed_addr`` function. However, it does not provide this guarantee for
a constant initializer folded into a function body. This intrinsic can be
used to avoid the possibility of overflows when loading from such a constant.

.. _llvm_sideeffect:

'``llvm.sideeffect``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare void @llvm.sideeffect() inaccessiblememonly nounwind willreturn

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.sideeffect`` intrinsic doesn't perform any operation. Optimizers
treat it as having side effects, so it can be inserted into a loop to
indicate that the loop shouldn't be assumed to terminate (which could
potentially lead to the loop being optimized away entirely), even if it's
an infinite loop with no other side effects.

Arguments:
""""""""""

None.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic actually does nothing, but optimizers must assume that it
has externally observable side effects.

'``llvm.is.constant.*``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use llvm.is.constant with any argument type.

::

      declare i1 @llvm.is.constant.i32(i32 %operand) nounwind memory(none)
      declare i1 @llvm.is.constant.f32(float %operand) nounwind memory(none)
      declare i1 @llvm.is.constant.TYPENAME(TYPE %operand) nounwind memory(none)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.is.constant``' intrinsic will return true if the argument
is known to be a manifest compile-time constant. It is guaranteed to
fold to either true or false before generating machine code.

Semantics:
""""""""""

This intrinsic generates no code. If its argument is known to be a
manifest compile-time constant value, then the intrinsic will be
converted to a constant true value. Otherwise, it will be converted to
a constant false value.

In particular, note that if the argument is a constant expression
which refers to a global (the address of which _is_ a constant, but
not manifest during the compile), then the intrinsic evaluates to
false.

The result also intentionally depends on the result of optimization
passes -- e.g., the result can change depending on whether a
function gets inlined or not. A function's parameters are
obviously not constant. However, a call like
``llvm.is.constant.i32(i32 %param)`` *can* return true after the
function is inlined, if the value passed to the function parameter was
a constant.

.. _int_ptrmask:

'``llvm.ptrmask``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptrty llvm.ptrmask(ptrty %ptr, intty %mask) speculatable memory(none)

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first argument is a pointer or vector of pointers. The second argument is
an integer or vector of integers with the same bit width as the index type
size of the first argument.

Overview:
""""""""""

The ``llvm.ptrmask`` intrinsic masks out bits of the pointer according to a mask.
This allows stripping data from tagged pointers without converting them to an
integer (ptrtoint/inttoptr). As a consequence, we can preserve more information
to facilitate alias analysis and underlying-object detection.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result of ``ptrmask(%ptr, %mask)`` is equivalent to the following expansion,
where ``iPtrIdx`` is the index type size of the pointer::

    %intptr = ptrtoint ptr %ptr to iPtrIdx ; this may truncate
    %masked = and iPtrIdx %intptr, %mask
    %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr
    %result = getelementptr i8, ptr %ptr, iPtrIdx %diff

If the pointer index type size is smaller than the pointer type size, this
implies that pointer bits beyond the index size are not affected by this
intrinsic. For integral pointers, it behaves as if the mask were extended with
1 bits to the pointer type size.

Both the returned pointer(s) and the first argument are based on the same
underlying object (for more information on the *based on* terminology see
:ref:`the pointer aliasing rules <pointeraliasing>`).

The intrinsic only captures the pointer argument through the return value.

.. _int_threadlocal_address:

'``llvm.threadlocal.address``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare ptr @llvm.threadlocal.address(ptr) nounwind willreturn memory(none)

Arguments:
""""""""""

The `llvm.threadlocal.address` intrinsic requires a global value argument (a
:ref:`global variable <globalvars>` or alias) that is thread local.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The address of a thread local global is not a constant, since it depends on
the calling thread. The `llvm.threadlocal.address` intrinsic returns the
address of the given thread local global in the calling thread.

.. _int_vscale:

'``llvm.vscale``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare i32 llvm.vscale.i32()
      declare i64 llvm.vscale.i64()

Overview:
"""""""""

The ``llvm.vscale`` intrinsic returns the value for ``vscale`` in scalable
vectors such as ``<vscale x 16 x i8>``.

Semantics:
""""""""""

``vscale`` is a positive value that is constant throughout program
execution, but is unknown at compile time.
If the result value does not fit in the result type, then the result is
a :ref:`poison value <poisonvalues>`.


Stack Map Intrinsics
--------------------

LLVM provides experimental intrinsics to support runtime patching
mechanisms commonly desired in dynamic language JITs. These intrinsics
are described in :doc:`StackMaps`.

Element Wise Atomic Memory Intrinsics
-------------------------------------

These intrinsics are similar to the standard library memory intrinsics except
that they perform memory transfer as a sequence of atomic memory accesses.

.. _int_memcpy_element_unordered_atomic:

'``llvm.memcpy.element.unordered.atomic``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.memcpy.element.unordered.atomic`` on
any integer bit width and for different address spaces. Not all targets
support all bit widths however.

::

      declare void @llvm.memcpy.element.unordered.atomic.p0.p0.i32(ptr <dest>,
                                                                   ptr <src>,
                                                                   i32 <len>,
                                                                   i32 <element_size>)
      declare void @llvm.memcpy.element.unordered.atomic.p0.p0.i64(ptr <dest>,
                                                                   ptr <src>,
                                                                   i64 <len>,
                                                                   i32 <element_size>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memcpy.element.unordered.atomic.*``' intrinsic is a specialization of the
'``llvm.memcpy.*``' intrinsic. It differs in that the ``dest`` and ``src`` are treated
as arrays with elements that are exactly ``element_size`` bytes, and the copy between
buffers uses a sequence of :ref:`unordered atomic <ordering>` load/store operations
that are a positive integer multiple of the ``element_size`` in size.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments are the same as they are in the :ref:`@llvm.memcpy <int_memcpy>`
intrinsic, with the added constraint that ``len`` is required to be a positive integer
multiple of the ``element_size``. If ``len`` is not a positive integer multiple of
``element_size``, then the behavior of the intrinsic is undefined.

``element_size`` must be a compile-time constant positive power of two no greater than
target-specific atomic access size limit.

For each of the input pointers ``align`` parameter attribute must be specified. It
must be a power of two no less than the ``element_size``. Caller guarantees that
both the source and destination pointers are aligned to that boundary.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memcpy.element.unordered.atomic.*``' intrinsic copies ``len`` bytes of
memory from the source location to the destination location. These locations are not
allowed to overlap. The memory copy is performed as a sequence of load/store operations
where each access is guaranteed to be a multiple of ``element_size`` bytes wide and
aligned at an ``element_size`` boundary.

The order of the copy is unspecified. The same value may be read from the source
buffer many times, but only one write is issued to the destination buffer per
element. It is well defined to have concurrent reads and writes to both source and
destination provided those reads and writes are unordered atomic when specified.

This intrinsic does not provide any additional ordering guarantees over those
provided by a set of unordered loads from the source location and stores to the
destination.

Lowering:
"""""""""

In the most general case call to the '``llvm.memcpy.element.unordered.atomic.*``' is
lowered to a call to the symbol ``__llvm_memcpy_element_unordered_atomic_*``. Where '*'
is replaced with an actual element size. See :ref:`RewriteStatepointsForGC intrinsic
lowering <RewriteStatepointsForGC_intrinsic_lowering>` for details on GC specific
lowering.

Optimizer is allowed to inline memory copy when it's profitable to do so.

'``llvm.memmove.element.unordered.atomic``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use
``llvm.memmove.element.unordered.atomic`` on any integer bit width and for
different address spaces. Not all targets support all bit widths however.

::

      declare void @llvm.memmove.element.unordered.atomic.p0.p0.i32(ptr <dest>,
                                                                    ptr <src>,
                                                                    i32 <len>,
                                                                    i32 <element_size>)
      declare void @llvm.memmove.element.unordered.atomic.p0.p0.i64(ptr <dest>,
                                                                    ptr <src>,
                                                                    i64 <len>,
                                                                    i32 <element_size>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memmove.element.unordered.atomic.*``' intrinsic is a specialization
of the '``llvm.memmove.*``' intrinsic. It differs in that the ``dest`` and
``src`` are treated as arrays with elements that are exactly ``element_size``
bytes, and the copy between buffers uses a sequence of
:ref:`unordered atomic <ordering>` load/store operations that are a positive
integer multiple of the ``element_size`` in size.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments are the same as they are in the
:ref:`@llvm.memmove <int_memmove>` intrinsic, with the added constraint that
``len`` is required to be a positive integer multiple of the ``element_size``.
If ``len`` is not a positive integer multiple of ``element_size``, then the
behavior of the intrinsic is undefined.

``element_size`` must be a compile-time constant positive power of two no
greater than a target-specific atomic access size limit.

For each of the input pointers the ``align`` parameter attribute must be
specified. It must be a power of two no less than the ``element_size``. Caller
guarantees that both the source and destination pointers are aligned to that
boundary.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memmove.element.unordered.atomic.*``' intrinsic copies ``len`` bytes
of memory from the source location to the destination location. These locations
are allowed to overlap. The memory copy is performed as a sequence of load/store
operations where each access is guaranteed to be a multiple of ``element_size``
bytes wide and aligned at an ``element_size`` boundary.

The order of the copy is unspecified. The same value may be read from the source
buffer many times, but only one write is issued to the destination buffer per
element. It is well defined to have concurrent reads and writes to both source
and destination provided those reads and writes are unordered atomic when
specified.

This intrinsic does not provide any additional ordering guarantees over those
provided by a set of unordered loads from the source location and stores to the
destination.

Lowering:
"""""""""

In the most general case call to the
'``llvm.memmove.element.unordered.atomic.*``' is lowered to a call to the symbol
``__llvm_memmove_element_unordered_atomic_*``. Where '*' is replaced with an
actual element size. See :ref:`RewriteStatepointsForGC intrinsic lowering
<RewriteStatepointsForGC_intrinsic_lowering>` for details on GC specific
lowering.

The optimizer is allowed to inline the memory copy when it's profitable to do so.

.. _int_memset_element_unordered_atomic:

'``llvm.memset.element.unordered.atomic``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

This is an overloaded intrinsic. You can use ``llvm.memset.element.unordered.atomic`` on
any integer bit width and for different address spaces. Not all targets
support all bit widths however.

::

      declare void @llvm.memset.element.unordered.atomic.p0.i32(ptr <dest>,
                                                                i8 <value>,
                                                                i32 <len>,
                                                                i32 <element_size>)
      declare void @llvm.memset.element.unordered.atomic.p0.i64(ptr <dest>,
                                                                i8 <value>,
                                                                i64 <len>,
                                                                i32 <element_size>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.memset.element.unordered.atomic.*``' intrinsic is a specialization of the
'``llvm.memset.*``' intrinsic. It differs in that the ``dest`` is treated as an array
with elements that are exactly ``element_size`` bytes, and the assignment to that array
uses uses a sequence of :ref:`unordered atomic <ordering>` store operations
that are a positive integer multiple of the ``element_size`` in size.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The first three arguments are the same as they are in the :ref:`@llvm.memset <int_memset>`
intrinsic, with the added constraint that ``len`` is required to be a positive integer
multiple of the ``element_size``. If ``len`` is not a positive integer multiple of
``element_size``, then the behavior of the intrinsic is undefined.

``element_size`` must be a compile-time constant positive power of two no greater than
target-specific atomic access size limit.

The ``dest`` input pointer must have the ``align`` parameter attribute specified. It
must be a power of two no less than the ``element_size``. Caller guarantees that
the destination pointer is aligned to that boundary.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.memset.element.unordered.atomic.*``' intrinsic sets the ``len`` bytes of
memory starting at the destination location to the given ``value``. The memory is
set with a sequence of store operations where each access is guaranteed to be a
multiple of ``element_size`` bytes wide and aligned at an ``element_size`` boundary.

The order of the assignment is unspecified. Only one write is issued to the
destination buffer per element. It is well defined to have concurrent reads and
writes to the destination provided those reads and writes are unordered atomic
when specified.

This intrinsic does not provide any additional ordering guarantees over those
provided by a set of unordered stores to the destination.

Lowering:
"""""""""

In the most general case call to the '``llvm.memset.element.unordered.atomic.*``' is
lowered to a call to the symbol ``__llvm_memset_element_unordered_atomic_*``. Where '*'
is replaced with an actual element size.

The optimizer is allowed to inline the memory assignment when it's profitable to do so.

Objective-C ARC Runtime Intrinsics
----------------------------------

LLVM provides intrinsics that lower to Objective-C ARC runtime entry points.
LLVM is aware of the semantics of these functions, and optimizes based on that
knowledge. You can read more about the details of Objective-C ARC `here
<https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html>`_.

'``llvm.objc.autorelease``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.autorelease(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_autorelease <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-autorelease>`_.

'``llvm.objc.autoreleasePoolPop``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare void @llvm.objc.autoreleasePoolPop(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_autoreleasePoolPop <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#void-objc-autoreleasepoolpop-void-pool>`_.

'``llvm.objc.autoreleasePoolPush``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.autoreleasePoolPush()

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_autoreleasePoolPush <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#void-objc-autoreleasepoolpush-void>`_.

'``llvm.objc.autoreleaseReturnValue``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.autoreleaseReturnValue(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_autoreleaseReturnValue <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-autoreleasereturnvalue>`_.

'``llvm.objc.copyWeak``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare void @llvm.objc.copyWeak(ptr, ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_copyWeak <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#void-objc-copyweak-id-dest-id-src>`_.

'``llvm.objc.destroyWeak``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare void @llvm.objc.destroyWeak(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_destroyWeak <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#void-objc-destroyweak-id-object>`_.

'``llvm.objc.initWeak``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.initWeak(ptr, ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_initWeak <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-initweak>`_.

'``llvm.objc.loadWeak``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.loadWeak(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_loadWeak <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-loadweak>`_.

'``llvm.objc.loadWeakRetained``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.loadWeakRetained(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_loadWeakRetained <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-loadweakretained>`_.

'``llvm.objc.moveWeak``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare void @llvm.objc.moveWeak(ptr, ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_moveWeak <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#void-objc-moveweak-id-dest-id-src>`_.

'``llvm.objc.release``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare void @llvm.objc.release(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_release <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#void-objc-release-id-value>`_.

'``llvm.objc.retain``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.retain(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_retain <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-retain>`_.

'``llvm.objc.retainAutorelease``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.retainAutorelease(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_retainAutorelease <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-retainautorelease>`_.

'``llvm.objc.retainAutoreleaseReturnValue``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.retainAutoreleaseReturnValue(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_retainAutoreleaseReturnValue <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-retainautoreleasereturnvalue>`_.

'``llvm.objc.retainAutoreleasedReturnValue``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.retainAutoreleasedReturnValue(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_retainAutoreleasedReturnValue <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-retainautoreleasedreturnvalue>`_.

'``llvm.objc.retainBlock``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.retainBlock(ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_retainBlock <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-retainblock>`_.

'``llvm.objc.storeStrong``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare void @llvm.objc.storeStrong(ptr, ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_storeStrong <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#void-objc-storestrong-id-object-id-value>`_.

'``llvm.objc.storeWeak``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare ptr @llvm.objc.storeWeak(ptr, ptr)

Lowering:
"""""""""

Lowers to a call to `objc_storeWeak <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AutomaticReferenceCounting.html#arc-runtime-objc-storeweak>`_.

Preserving Debug Information Intrinsics
---------------------------------------

These intrinsics are used to carry certain debuginfo together with
IR-level operations. For example, it may be desirable to
know the structure/union name and the original user-level field
indices. Such information got lost in IR GetElementPtr instruction
since the IR types are different from debugInfo types and unions
are converted to structs in IR.

'``llvm.preserve.array.access.index``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare <ret_type>
      @llvm.preserve.array.access.index.p0s_union.anons.p0a10s_union.anons(<type> base,
                                                                           i32 dim,
                                                                           i32 index)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.preserve.array.access.index``' intrinsic returns the getelementptr address
based on array base ``base``, array dimension ``dim`` and the last access index ``index``
into the array. The return type ``ret_type`` is a pointer type to the array element.
The array ``dim`` and ``index`` are preserved which is more robust than
getelementptr instruction which may be subject to compiler transformation.
The ``llvm.preserve.access.index`` type of metadata is attached to this call instruction
to provide array or pointer debuginfo type.
The metadata is a ``DICompositeType`` or ``DIDerivedType`` representing the
debuginfo version of ``type``.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``base`` is the array base address.  The ``dim`` is the array dimension.
The ``base`` is a pointer if ``dim`` equals 0.
The ``index`` is the last access index into the array or pointer.

The ``base`` argument must be annotated with an :ref:`elementtype
<attr_elementtype>` attribute at the call-site. This attribute specifies the
getelementptr element type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.preserve.array.access.index``' intrinsic produces the same result
as a getelementptr with base ``base`` and access operands ``{dim's 0's, index}``.

'``llvm.preserve.union.access.index``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare <type>
      @llvm.preserve.union.access.index.p0s_union.anons.p0s_union.anons(<type> base,
                                                                        i32 di_index)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.preserve.union.access.index``' intrinsic carries the debuginfo field index
``di_index`` and returns the ``base`` address.
The ``llvm.preserve.access.index`` type of metadata is attached to this call instruction
to provide union debuginfo type.
The metadata is a ``DICompositeType`` representing the debuginfo version of ``type``.
The return type ``type`` is the same as the ``base`` type.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``base`` is the union base address. The ``di_index`` is the field index in debuginfo.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.preserve.union.access.index``' intrinsic returns the ``base`` address.

'``llvm.preserve.struct.access.index``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""
::

      declare <ret_type>
      @llvm.preserve.struct.access.index.p0i8.p0s_struct.anon.0s(<type> base,
                                                                 i32 gep_index,
                                                                 i32 di_index)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.preserve.struct.access.index``' intrinsic returns the getelementptr address
based on struct base ``base`` and IR struct member index ``gep_index``.
The ``llvm.preserve.access.index`` type of metadata is attached to this call instruction
to provide struct debuginfo type.
The metadata is a ``DICompositeType`` representing the debuginfo version of ``type``.
The return type ``ret_type`` is a pointer type to the structure member.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The ``base`` is the structure base address. The ``gep_index`` is the struct member index
based on IR structures. The ``di_index`` is the struct member index based on debuginfo.

The ``base`` argument must be annotated with an :ref:`elementtype
<attr_elementtype>` attribute at the call-site. This attribute specifies the
getelementptr element type.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.preserve.struct.access.index``' intrinsic produces the same result
as a getelementptr with base ``base`` and access operands ``{0, gep_index}``.

'``llvm.fptrunc.round``' Intrinsic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

::

      declare <ty2>
      @llvm.fptrunc.round(<type> <value>, metadata <rounding mode>)

Overview:
"""""""""

The '``llvm.fptrunc.round``' intrinsic truncates
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` ``value`` to type ``ty2``
with a specified rounding mode.

Arguments:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.fptrunc.round``' intrinsic takes a :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` value to cast and a :ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type
to cast it to. This argument must be larger in size than the result.

The second argument specifies the rounding mode as described in the constrained
intrinsics section.
For this intrinsic, the "round.dynamic" mode is not supported.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The '``llvm.fptrunc.round``' intrinsic casts a ``value`` from a larger
:ref:`floating-point <t_floating>` type to a smaller :ref:`floating-point
<t_floating>` type.
This intrinsic is assumed to execute in the default :ref:`floating-point
environment <floatenv>` *except* for the rounding mode.
This intrinsic is not supported on all targets. Some targets may not support
all rounding modes.
