.\"	$OpenBSD: build-debug-info.1,v 1.3 2021/03/01 17:56:16 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 1 2021 $
.Dt BUILD-DEBUG-INFO 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm build-debug-info
.Nd generate packing-lists and Makefiles for debug packages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ev PORTSDIR Ns = Ns Ar path
.Nm
.Op Fl mnqvx
.Fl P Ar pkgdir
.Fl -
.Ar pkg_create_args ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a helper script for generating debug package information in
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5 ,
with similar calling conventions to
.Xr update-plist 1 .
.Pp
Along with options and environment variables,
.Nm
uses the exact same options and arguments that would be passed to
.Xr pkg_create 1 .
Since
.Xr pkg_create 1
normally takes one single actual
.Ar pkgname ,
there is no ambiguity in
.Ev MULTI_PACKAGES
situations.
.Pp
The first set of arguments correspond to the
.Sq default package .
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl P Ar pkgdir
directory used  for generating output (mandatory).
.It Fl q
Quiet mode.
Do not display status progress messages.
Note that this is not the opposite of verbose mode.
.It Fl v
Verbose mode.
Explain about directories stripped from dependencies.
Note that this is not the opposite of quiet mode.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
will read each packing-list
.Ar list
and generate a corresponding
.Ar debug-list
under
.Ar pkgdir .
.Pp
The full list of Makefile rules needed to generate those files and
directories will be written as
.Ar pkgdir/Makefile .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_add 1 ,
.Xr pkg_create 1 ,
.Xr update-plist 1 ,
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5
