.\"	$OpenBSD: check-lib-depends.1,v 1.6 2024/05/24 11:52:45 op Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 24 2024 $
.Dt CHECK-LIB-DEPENDS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm check-lib-depends
.Nd scan port for shared libraries
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm check-lib-depends
.Op Fl fimqx
.Op Fl B Ar destdir
.Op Fl d Ar pkgrepo
.Op Fl D Ar directory
.Op Fl F Ar missing
.Op Fl O Ar dest
.Op Fl S Ar VAR Ns = Ns Ar value
.Op Fl s Ar source
.Op Ar package ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
scans a port or package for shared libraries, and verify that all of them
are properly recorded.
.Pp
.Nm
can either scan files from a built port after the
.Ar fake stage
from the
.Ev WRKINST
directory, or look directly inside a
.Ar package .
.Pp
Likewise, it can also verify dependencies of installed packages,
or figure them out directly from the port directory.
.Pp
.Nm
actually consists of two distinct stages:
.Bl -bullet
.It
scan all binaries inside a package to extract libraries and rpaths,
using
.Xr objdump 1 .
.It
compare those libraries against the port's registered dependencies
and report problems.
.El
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width keyword
.It Fl B Ar destdir
Scan files under
.Ar destdir .
.It Fl d Ar pkgrepo
Look for all needed packages under directory
.Ar pkgrepo .
.It Fl D Ar directory
Create debug log files under
.Ar directory
that show in more details the run of
.Xr objdump 1 .
.It Fl f
Give full reports of every file that requires a missing library.
.It Fl F Ar missing
Works in tandem with
.Fl S .
Allow backsubstituting even if the
.Ar missing
library
is actually not part of the actual
.Ev WANTLIB
of the package.
Mostly used to waive the presence of
.Ar pthread ,
a mandatory dependency of C++ libraries on some architectures.
.It Fl i
Read packing-list from standard input.
.It Fl m
Always show progress-meter, even if not run from terminal.
.It Fl O Ar dest
Save result of first stage in file
.Ar dest .
.It Fl q
Be quiet, do not emit
.Sq Extra:
wantlibs unless there's also an actual problem.
.It Fl S Ar var Ns = Ns Ar value
Recognize list of libraries listed in a variable, and replace said list
with variable value.
For instance,
.Fl S Ar COMPILER_LIBCXX Ns = Ns Ar stdc++
will replace
.Sq stdc++
with
.Sq ${COMPILER_LIBCXX}
in
.Ev WANTLIB
lists for compatibility with both clang and gcc.
Order matters.
The first
.Fl S
option will be handled first.
.It Fl s Ar src
Don't scan, directly read result of first stage from file
.Ar src .
.It Fl x
Don't show progress-meter, even if run from terminal.
.El
.Pp
If no
.Ar package
is given, and the
.Fl i
option is used,
.Nm
will retrieve the packing-list from stdin, and scan the package according
to other options.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ldd 1 ,
.Xr objdump 1 ,
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5 ,
.Xr elf 5
.Sh BUGS
Currently,
.Nm
doesn't handle libraries living in subdirectories of
.Sq ${LOCALBASE}
correctly.
