.\"	$OpenBSD: clean-old-distfiles.1,v 1.5 2023/07/06 10:43:37 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 6 2023 $
.Dt CLEAN-OLD-DISTFILES 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clean-old-distfiles
.Nd remove obsolete ports distfiles
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm clean-old-distfiles
.Op Fl mnvx
.Op Fl e Ar except
.Op Fl h Ar history
.Op Ar timestamp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Each time
.Xr dpb 1
is run for a full scan of the
.Xr ports 7
tree, it appends to the
.Pa history
log, listing files in the
.Pa distfiles
directory that are not, or no longer,
needed for building the complete tree.
It can also be run solely for that purpose, by using:
.Pp
.D1 $ Sy dpb Fl D Cm HISTORY_ONLY
.Pp
When
.Nm
is run later, it uses the information from the history log
to delete unneeded files.
When a file is deleted, the corresponding entry is also deleted
from the history log.
.Pp
By default,
.Nm
deletes all files listed in the history log.
.Pp
If a
.Ar timestamp
is given, it is interpreted as a number of seconds since the Epoch,
similar to the
.Xr date 1
.Fl r
argument, and only those files are deleted that were recorded as
obsolete at that time or earlier.
It can also be set to a date in ISO8601 format, like
.Sq 2023-07-01
or
.Sq 2023-07-02T12:00:00Z .
.Pp
For normal files,
.Nm
verifies
.Xr sha256 1
checksums prior to removal.
It also removes links under
.Pa by_cipher/sha256 ,
but it trusts that the checksums for these are accurate.
.Pp
Options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width nnnn
.It Fl e Ar except
Read exception list from file
.Ar except .
Each line is the name of a file that shouldn't be removed.
.It Fl h Ar history
Read log from history file
.Ar history
instead of the default
.Pa /usr/ports/distfiles/history .
Turns on
.Fl nv ,
as this is a testing option.
.It Fl m
Causes
.Nm
to display the progress meter even if not on a terminal.
.It Fl n
Don't really remove files.
.It Fl v
Display what will be removed, as
.Ql rm file
lines.
.It Fl x
Causes
.Nm
to not display the progress meter.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/ports
.It Pa /usr/ports
base of the ports tree, can be overridden with env variable
.Ev PORTSDIR .
.It Pa /usr/ports/distfiles
location of the distfiles repository, can be overridden with env variable
.Ev DISTDIR .
.It Pa /usr/ports/distfiles/history
log of obsolete distfiles.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dpb 1 ,
.Xr sha256 1 ,
.Xr mirroring-ports 7
