.\"	$OpenBSD: pkg_check-version.1,v 1.3 2022/04/19 15:03:12 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: April 19 2022 $
.Dt PKG_CHECK-VERSION 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_check-version
.Nd verify parsing and ordering of package names
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Hv
.Ar pkgname ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
takes a list of
.Ar pkgname
and processes them.
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
each name is parsed and checked for issues.
.It
in addition, comparable names (same stem and same flavor) are sorted
from older to newer version.
.El
.Pp
Options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Hv
.It Fl H
displays a human-readable version of each
.Ar pkgname
(full version parsing, including known suffixes, dewey numbers parsing,
REVISION, EPOCH, flavor markers).
.It Fl v
verbose mode, which will explicitly state
.Ar pkgname
with no issues and sort one element lists.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The
.Nm
utility exits with 0, unless one of the
.Ar pkgname
was malformed, or two names are actually non comparable
.Po
such as
.Sq moo-1.23pre1
and
.Sq moo-1.23rc1
.Pc .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr packages-specs 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Marc Espie Aq Mt espie@openbsd.org
