.\"	$OpenBSD: pkg_check-problems.1,v 1.1 2018/07/10 09:05:47 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010-2015 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 10 2018 $
.Dt PKG_CHECK-PROBLEMS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_check-problems
.Nd verify problems in package collections
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl CDesv
.Op Fl d Ar plist_dir
.Op Fl o Ar output
.Op Fl p Ar ports_dir
.Op Ar pkgname ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used to check a collection of packages for problems that cannot be
noticed in individual packages, such as conflict and directory registration
issues.
.Pp
A conflict is a file that belongs to two distinct packages.
.Pp
By default, packages with the same stem
.Po
see
.Xr packages-specs 7
.Pc
are registered to conflict.
This can be changed to add or remove extra conflict registration with
.Cm @option no-default-conflict
or
.Cm @conflict
.Po
see
.Xr pkg_create 1
.Pc .
.Pp
Conflicts between packages mean that a user can't have both packages installed
at the same time.
In some cases (same software, different version), this is expected, but
the packages should be marked as conflicting, so that
.Xr pkg_add 1
knows how to deal with it.
In other cases, this is an oversight from the ports maintainer, and action
should be taken to make sure both packages can be installed simultaneously.
Conflicts also interact with dependencies, and sometimes a missing dependency
will show up as an unregistered conflict.
.Pp
Directories can belong to distinct packages, as long as they are registered
somewhere.
Every directory that is not part of the standard
.Xr mtree 8
set should appear in a packing-list somewhere.
.Pp
Contrary to files, directories can be shared between several packages.
.Pp
.Nm
knows enough about packages to trace directories back to a common dependency,
or to not flag two packages as conflicting when they depend on already
conflicting packages.
.Pp
.Nm
requires a set of packing-lists to operate, which it can obtain from
several sources.
The preferred source is the packing-list databases
.Po
see
.Ar PACKAGE_REPOSITORY
in
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5
and
.Xr register-plist 1
.Pc ,
as it persists over time and can be used to fix update information as well
as current version information.
.Pp
It should be supplemented with the ports tree itself in order to figure
out current versions.
.Pp
Options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width packing-list
.It Fl C
Do not compute conflict information.
.It Fl D
Do not compute common dir information.
.It Fl e
Check for extra logical conflicts, by adding supplementary
formatted/unformatted manpages, as same name manpages under the
same base directory will shadow one another.
.It Fl o Ar output
Save results to output file as well as writing it on the screen.
.It Fl s
Be silent.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
.It Fl d Ar plist-dir
Scan directory
.Ar plist-dir
for packing-lists.
.It Fl p Ar portsdir
Traverse the ports directory for packing-lists, using
.Ar print-plist-all .
More than one directory could be specified by delimiting them by colon,
e.g.:
.Pa /usr/ports/x11/kde:/usr/ports/x11/kde4 .
.Pp
If
.Fl d Ar plist-dir
is also used, traverse only the directories corresponding to the packages
under
.Ar plist-dir
to figure out current pkgnames, and annotate those with a
.Sq \&!
in the report.
.El
.Sh SAMPLE OUTPUT
.Bd -literal
Dependency not found zarafa-webaccess-7.1.11p2
Dependency not found kwebkitpart-1.2p3
[...]
Common dirs:
!claws-mail-gdata-3.11.1p1-ldap(mail/claws-mail,-gdata,ldap): /usr/local/lib/claws-mail
!claws-mail-pdfviewer-3.11.1p1-ldap(mail/claws-mail,-pdfviewer,ldap): /usr/local/lib/claws-mail
[...]
Conflicts:
!arm-none-eabi-gdb-7.9.1(devel/arm-none-eabi/gdb),!gdb-7.9.1(devel/gdb)
	/usr/local/include/gdb/jit-reader.h
	/usr/local/share/gdb/system-gdbinit/elinos.py
	/usr/local/share/gdb/system-gdbinit/wrs-linux.py
!libnet-1.0.2ap0v0(net/libnet/1.0),libnet-1.0.2ap2(net/libnet/1.0),libnet-1.0.2av0(net/libnet/1.0)
	/usr/local/bin/libnet-config-1.0
	/usr/local/include/libnet-1.0/libnet.h
	/usr/local/include/libnet-1.0/libnet/libnet-asn1.h
	/usr/local/include/libnet-1.0/libnet/libnet-functions.h
	/usr/local/include/libnet-1.0/libnet/libnet-headers.h
	/usr/local/include/libnet-1.0/libnet/libnet-macros.h
	/usr/local/include/libnet-1.0/libnet/libnet-ospf.h
	/usr/local/include/libnet-1.0/libnet/libnet-structures.h
	/usr/local/lib/libnet-1.0/libnet.a
	/usr/local/lib/libnet-1.0/libnet.so.0.0
	/usr/local/lib/libnet-1.0/libpwrite.a
	/usr/local/lib/libnet.so.0.0
	/usr/local/man/cat3/libnet.0
[...]
zathura-pdf-mupdf-0.2.7(textproc/zathura/plugins/mupdf),zathura-pdf-poppler-0.2.5(textproc/zathura/plugins/poppler)
	/usr/local/lib/zathura/pdf.so
.Ed
.Bl -bullet
.It
Dependency not found: means some package names could not be found.
Most often happens because of panic issues, and fsck not recovering some
dependency files.
.It
claws-mail directory: missing directory registration.
.Nm
could not find a common ancestor to claws-mail-gdata and claws-mail-pdfviewer,
so it should be added to both.
.It
Conflict between arm-non-eabi-gdb and gdb:
note that both packages are current.
Two choices: either remove the offending files from one package (might break
the other), or mark an explicit conflict between the packages (will prevent
people from installing both at the same time).
.It
Conflict between libnet-...v0 and libnet:
Note that only the v0 version is current.
People forgot to augment the
.Cm @option no-default-conflict
with conflicts against the old version when bumping the
.Ar EPOCH .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_add 1 ,
.Xr pkg_create 1 ,
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5 ,
.Xr packages-specs 7
