.\"	$OpenBSD: pkg_check-manpages.1,v 1.1 2018/07/10 09:05:47 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 10 2018 $
.Dt PKG_CHECK-MANPAGES 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_check-manpages
.Nd verify manpage subjects in packages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl p
.Op Ar pkgname ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used to check manpages in a collection of packages.
It will extract all manpages from the
.Ar pkgname
arguments into a directory named
.Pa manpages.XXXXXXXXXXXX
.Po
see
.Xr mktemp 1
.Pc
and run them through
.Xr makewhatis 8 .
.Pp
Note that this directory is not cleared on exit, so that the problematic
manpages can be examined more precisely.
.Pp
If no
.Ar pkgname
argument is passed, it will process all
.Pa *.tgz
files in the current directory.
.Pp
Options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width packing-list
.It Fl p
Run
.Xr makewhatis 8
in picky mode.
.El
.Pp
Errors reported in picky mode should usually be fixed, as it means the
subject line stored in the whatis database will be useless to find out
the corresponding manpage.
