.\"	$OpenBSD: pkg_subst.1,v 1.1 2018/06/26 05:38:49 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 26 2018 $
.Dt PKG_SUBST 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_subst
.Nd substitute variables' values in files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm pkg_subst
.Op Fl ci
.Op Fl B Ar basedir
.Op Fl D Ar name Ns Op = Ns Ar value
.Op Fl g Ar group
.Op Fl m Ar mode
.Op Fl o Ar owner
.Op Ar file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used within the ports tree to substitute variable values, using
the exact same conventions used by
.Xr pkg_create 1 .
Constructs like
.Li ${VAR}
will be replaced with the variable value, according to
.Fl D Ar name Ns Op = Ns Ar value
options.
.Pp
The options are as follows
.Bl -tag -width Dname[=value]xxx
.It Fl B Ar basedir
Specify a basedir in which we know file properties.
It is forbidden to copy files from elsewhere without
.Fl m Ar mode .
.It Fl c
Copy and substitute.
Number of
.Ar file
arguments must be even.
They are paired as
.Ar src1
.Ar dest1 ,
.Ar src2
.Ar dest2 ...
and each
.Ar src
file is substituted and copied into the corresponding
.Ar dest
file.
.It Xo
.Fl D
.Ar name Ns Op = Ns Ar value
.Xc
Define
.Ar name
to
.Ar value ,
or to 1 if no value is given.
.It Fl g Ar group
Change group of destination file to
.Ar group .
.It Fl i
Ignore changes to group or owner that failed.
.It Fl m Ar mode
Change mode of destination file to
.Ar mode .
.It Fl o Ar owner
Change owner of destination file to
.Ar owner .
.El
.Pp
If no
.Ar file
arguments is given,
.Nm
acts as a filter from stdin to stdout.
.Pp
Without
.Fl c ,
each
.Ar file
is backed up as
.Ar file.beforesubst
before the substitution occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr install 1 ,
.Xr pkg_create 1
