.\"	$OpenBSD: pkg_outdated.1,v 1.2 2018/07/09 18:27:58 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2018 $
.Dt PKG_OUTDATED 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_outdated
.Nd compare installed packages and the ports tree
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl mqvx
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
checks installed packages and compares them to the ports tree.
It displays packages that may need updating.
Typical output is a subdirlist with comments, suitable for bulk building.
.Pp
Options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width pkgpathlonger
.It Fl m
Causes
.Nm
to always display the progress meter in cases it would not do so by default.
.It Fl q
Quick check, only verifies the names and not full update signatures.
Use is discouraged.
.It Fl v
Verbose mode.
Does not do anything yet.
.It Fl x
Disable progress meter.
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Bernd Ahlers
