.\"	$OpenBSD: port-search-helper.1,v 1.3 2018/11/30 18:40:57 danj Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 30 2018 $
.Dt PORT-SEARCH-HELPER 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm port-search-helper
.Nd find index entry in ports index according to selected criteria
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm index Ns = Ns Ar file
.Op Cm category Ns = Ns Ar cat
.Op Cm maintainer Ns = Ns Ar person
.Op Cm key Ns = Ns Ar value
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
scans index file
.Ar file
for index entry (or entries) according to selected criteria,
such as category, maintainer name or actual name.
.Pp
Matching is done using perl regular expressions, and corresponding entries
get printed as a list on a single line on standard output.
.Nm
is a helper script used by
.Pa ${PORTSDIR}/Makefile
for searches.
.Pp
It relies on
.Pa ${LOCALBASE}/share/ports-INDEX
being accurate.
Note the portslist package must be installed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr perlre 1 ,
.Xr ports 7
