.\"     $OpenBSD: portimport.1,v 1.1 2018/06/26 05:38:49 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Robert Peichaer
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 26 2018 $
.Dt PORTIMPORT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm portimport
.Nd import a new port to the ports cvs repository
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl p Ar portsdir
.Op Fl u Ar username
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used to import the directories and files of a new port to the
.Ox
ports
.Xr cvs 1
repository, avoiding common mistakes.
It has to be executed from within the new port's directory.
.Pp
.Nm
calls the
.Xr portcheck 1
internally to verify that directory and file structure for a port is in
place and that no bogus files exist, and also to detect the
.Ev PKGPATH
for a port.
.Pp
The import is done in two steps.
In the first step, the
.Fl n
option of the cvs command is used to only check for possible problems
without changing anything and shows the cvs path where the new port will
be imported.
In the second step, the current ports directory is imported to the
.Ox
ports cvs repository.
After the import, the new port is checked out in the respective directory
of the local ports tree.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl p Ar portsdir
Forces the given directory to be treated as ports root directory.
Passed through to
.Xr portcheck 1 .
.It Fl u Ar username
Set the username used for
.Xr ssh 1 ,
and to compose vendor and release tags.
Defaults to the local username.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cvs 1 ,
.Xr portcheck 1
.Sh HISTORY
This command is based on the portimport script of Marc Espie, lightly
modified by Stuart Henderson and rewritten by Robert Peichaer.
Later, actual checks were moved to a separate utility,
.Xr portcheck 1 .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Ev CVSROOT
environment variable is not used.
