.\" $OpenBSD: portgen.1,v 1.9 2022/08/13 07:14:07 kmos Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Giannis Tsaraias <tsg@openbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Vadim Zhukov <zhuk@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 13 2022 $
.Dt PORTGEN 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm portgen
.Nd port modules on the fly
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm portgen
.Op Fl m Ar makeopt
.Ar type
.Ar module-name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility creates ports for the given
.Ar module-name
from
.Ar type
module framework.
The module is downloaded, analyzed and translated into a port.
Any missing dependencies are handled recursively.
New ports will land under ${PORTSDIR}/mystuff.
The
.Ev PORTSDIR
value will be taken from current user environment, and defaults to
.Pa /usr/ports .
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl m Ar makeopt
Pass
.Ar makeopt
to
.Xr make 1
invocations while resolving missing dependencies, mostly useful with
.Sq FETCH_PACKAGES=
to avoid building everything from scratch.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
utility currently supports the following
.Ar type
values:
.Pp
.Bl -inset -offset indent -compact
.It Cm p5
for Perl modules on CPAN.
.It Cm ruby
for Ruby gems.
.It Cm go
for Go modules.
.El
.Pp
A
.Cm go
module may be used with an
.Ar @version
suffix to specify a tag or branch to port.
The default suffix is
.Ar @latest ,
which is interpreted as the latest release.
.Pp
The following packages must be installed prior to the invocation of
.Nm :
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Cm sqlports
.It
.Cm p5-DBI
.It
.Cm p5-DBD-SQLite
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following command will download the latest version of Config::AutoConf
from CPAN, parse it and create a port for it:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Nm
p5 Config::AutoConf
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port-modules 5 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility first appeared in
.Ox 5.9
as a result of Google Summer of Code 2015.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Giannis Tsaraias Aq Mt tsg@openbsd.org
.Sh CAVEATS
Not every module could be converted to a port.
