.\"     $OpenBSD: portbump.1,v 1.1 2018/06/26 05:38:49 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Vadim Zhukov
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 26 2018 $
.Dt PORTBUMP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm portbump
.Nd tweaks port revisions and library versions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl lMmnrv
.Op Fl W Ar wlib
.Op Fl w Ar wlib
.Op Ar portref ...
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl o Ar file
.Op Fl lMmnrv
.Op Fl W Ar addlib
.Op Fl w Ar rmlib
.Op Ar portref ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used to increase ('bump')
.Ev REVISION
and
.Ev SHARED_LIBS
values in
.Ox
ports.
It also can remove
.Ev REVISION
marks and add, update or remove
.Ev WANTLIB
items.
.Pp
.Ar portref
has the same syntax as
.Ev FULLPKGPATH
port variable, see
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5 .
Actually, you can feed a list of pkgpaths as parameters; flavor
information will be ignored.
.Nm
doesn't care about actual subdirectory portion of
.Ar portref ,
so you can freely pass
.Pa \&. ,
.Pa ../foo
or anything else like this.
.Pp
If subpackage is not specified in port reference, then all subpackages
of a port will be processed.
If no port references are given, the port in current directory will
be processed.
.Pp
Default mode of operation is increasing
.Ev REVISION
mark values (
.Fl r ) .
Operations on
.Ev REVISION
marks and on
.Ev SHARED_LIBS
could be combined by explicit specifying corresponding flags, see below.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d
Delete all
.Ev REVISION
marks in
.Pa Makefile .
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl r .
.It Fl l
Recreate all
.Ev WANTLIB
items based on output of
.Sq make port-lib-depends-check .
If used twice or more, the
.Sq make lib-depends-check
will be used instead.
The
.Fl l
mode is incompatible with
.Fl W
and
.Fl w .
.It Fl M
Increment by one major component of all
.Ev SHARED_LIBS ,
resetting minor one to zero if needed.
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl m .
.It Fl m
Increment by one minor component of all
.Ev SHARED_LIBS .
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl M .
.It Fl n
Do not replace
.Pa Makefile
but save modified version in the
.Pa Makefile.bump
instead.
.It Fl o Ar file
Send modified Makefile contents to a given file instead of creating
.Pa Makefile.bump
in port's directory.
This could be only used if not more than one port is specified;
multiple subpackages of a single port could be specified, though.
.It Fl r
Increment
.Ev REVISION
values for all subpackages, or only for given ones.
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl d .
.It Fl W Ar wlib
.It Fl w Ar wlib
Adds or updates (the
.Fl W
flag) or removes (the
.Fl w
flag)
.Ev WANTLIB
items in whole port, or in particular subpackages, if given.
Both options could be specified multiple times, accumulating
corresponding lists.
The
.Ev WANTLIB
entries will be fully re-generated based on previous contents.
Those modes are incompatible with
.Fl l .
.It Fl v
Enable printing of diagnostic messages to standard error output.
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Ox 5.6 .
