.\"	$OpenBSD: port-resolve-lib-helper.1,v 1.1 2018/07/09 14:53:30 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2018 $
.Dt PORT-RESOLVE-LIB-HELPER 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm port-resolve-lib-helper
.Nd resolve library specs during ports build
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl needed
.Op Fl silent
.Ar spec ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
resolve library specs against a list of installed libraries.
.Nm
takes a list of file names with full path on stdin,
and matches each library
.Ar spec
against those libraries,
using
.Xr library-specs 7
conventions.
.Pp
In particular,
.Ev X11BASE
and
.Ev LOCALBASE
are used to locate X11 libraries and port libraries.
.Pp
.Nm
will print the best libraries found in a format suitable for
.Cm @wantlib
.Po
see
.Xr pkg_create 1
.Pc .
.Pp
Each
.Ar spec
not found will result in an error message and exit code.
.Pp
If the option
.Fl silent
is used, nothing will be displayed.
.Pp
The option
.Fl needed
is used to sort out
.Ev LIB_DEPENDS :
.Nm
will succeed if at least one of the libraries matches against a shared
library passed on the command line.
.Pp
This is a helper script used by
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5
to complete all wantlib information for
.Xr pkg_create 1
and other tools.
