.\"	$OpenBSD: register-plist.1,v 1.7 2023/10/06 12:45:45 espie Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Marc Espie <espie@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: October 6 2023 $
.Dt REGISTER-PLIST 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm register-plist
.Nd smart diff and registration of packing-lists
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm register-plist
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl s Ar snapdir
.Ar dir
.Op Ar pkgname ...
.Nm
.Fl p
.Ar dir
.Nm
.Fl t
.Ar p1
.Ar p2
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used to check that a packing-list for a given package name doesn't change.
By default, it is invoked at the end of
.Li make package ,
and compares a temporary package with the
.Pa ${PLIST_REPOSITORY}
before moving it to
.Pa ${PACKAGE_REPOSITORY}/${MACHINE_ARCH}/all
.Po
see
.Ev PACKAGE_REPOSITORY
and
.Ev PLIST_REPOSITORY
in
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5
.Pc .
Package names (package stem plus version) are used to uniquely identify
packages.
When something in the package changes, the package name should change,
usually by increasing
.Ev REVISION .
.Pp
.Nm
checks for a lot of details, including DESCR contents.
Thus changes in MAINTAINER, hard and symlinks existence and values,
comments, and other things, will trigger
.Ev REVISION
bumps).
.Pp
Dependencies receive special treatment.
Addition or deletion of dependencies should warrant a bump, but
.Nm
will also verify that dependencies go
.Sq forward :
namely it's okay for a
.Cm @wantlib
to go from
.Pa liba.so.2.0
to
.Pa liba.so.3.0
but not the other way around.
.Pp
Starting with
.Ox 6.6 ,
.Cm @version
bumps allow system-wide change to affect plists without triggering an
error.
.Pp
.Nm
records a packing-list for each
.Ar pkgname
into the given directory
.Ar dir .
If no previous packing-list for the given pkgname exists, the packing-list
is recorded.
If a previous packing-list exists,
.Nm
compares both packing-list for discrepancies.
Whenever something significant changes,
.Nm
will display a diff of the differences, and exit with an error.
.Pp
Some items in the packing-list may change without actual problems.
For instance, dependencies are allowed to go forward.
On the other hand, some items like the package DESCR can't change at all.
Since this is a generated file, porters often overlook that items such as
the HOMEPAGE or the MAINTAINER's email address are embedded into that file,
and thus that changing these requires a REVISION bump.
.Pp
If option
.Fl n
is specified,
.Nm
will do the exact same checks, but will not write any new packing-list.
.Pp
If option
.Fl s Ar snapdir
is specified,
.Nm
will write the packing-list into a separate
.Ar snapdir
directory if there have been no errors
(snapshot directory, to record all packing-lists from the current snapshot).
.Pp
.Nm
can also be invoked with
.Fl p
and a
.Ar dir .
This will read the packing-list from standard input and check
that it would register correctly into
.Ar dir ,
as used by
target
.Cm check-register
in
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5 .
.Pp
.Nm
can also be invoked with
.Fl t
and two packing-lists
.Ar p1
.Ar p2
to directly compare those packing-lists.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5
