.TH IBND_DISCOVER_FABRIC 3  "July 25, 2008" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Programmer's Manual"
.SH "NAME"
ibnd_discover_fabric, ibnd_destroy_fabric, ibnd_debug ibnd_show_progress \- initialize ibnetdiscover library.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.nf
.B #include <infiniband/ibnetdisc.h>
.sp
.bi "ibnd_fabric_t *ibnd_discover_fabric(struct ibmad_port *ibmad_port, int timeout_ms, ib_portid_t *from, int hops)"
.BI "void ibnd_destroy_fabric(ibnd_fabric_t *fabric)"
.BI "void ibnd_debug(int i)"
.BI "void ibnd_show_progress(int i)"
.BI "int ibnd_set_max_smps_on_wire(int i)"
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B ibnd_discover_fabric()
Discover the fabric connected to the port specified by ibmad_port, using a timeout specified.  The "from" and "hops" parameters are optional and allow one to scan part of a fabric by specifying a node "from" and a number of hops away from that node to scan, "hops".  This gives the user a "sub-fabric" which is "centered" anywhere they chose.

ibmad_port must be opened with at least IB_SMI_CLASS and IB_SMI_DIRECT_CLASS
classes for ibnd_discover_fabric to work.

.B ibnd_destroy_fabric()
free all memory and resources associated with the fabric.

.B ibnd_debug()
Set the debug level to be printed as library operations take place.

.B ibnd_show_progress()
Indicate that the library should print debug output which shows it's progress
through the fabric.

.B ibnd_set_max_smps_on_wire()
Set the number of SMP\'s which will be issued on the wire simultaneously.

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.B ibnd_discover_fabric()
return NULL on failure, otherwise a valid ibnd_fabric_t object.

.B ibnd_destory_fabric(), ibnd_debug()
NONE

.B ibnd_set_max_smps_on_wire()
The previous value is returned

.SH "EXAMPLES"

.B Discover the entire fabric connected to device "mthca0", port 1.

	int mgmt_classes[2] = {IB_SMI_CLASS, IB_SMI_DIRECT_CLASS};
	struct ibmad_port *ibmad_port = mad_rpc_open_port(ca, ca_port, mgmt_classes, 2);
	ibnd_fabric_t *fabric = ibnd_discover_fabric(ibmad_port, 100, NULL, 0);
	...
	ibnd_destroy_fabric(fabric);
	mad_rpc_close_port(ibmad_port);

.B Discover only a single node and those nodes connected to it.

	...
	str2drpath(&(port_id.drpath), from, 0, 0);
	...
	ibnd_discover_fabric(ibmad_port, 100, &port_id, 1);
	...
.SH "SEE ALSO"
	libibmad, mad_rpc_open_port
.SH "AUTHORS"
.TP
Ira Weiny <weiny2@llnl.gov>
