.\"	$OpenBSD: ar.5,v 1.5 2015/12/24 01:47:25 bentley Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: ar.5,v 1.2 1995/03/25 06:39:38 glass Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)ar.5.5	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 24 2015 $
.Dt AR 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ar
.Nd archive (library) file format
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In ar.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The archive command
.Nm ar
combines several files into one.
Archives are mainly used as libraries of object files intended to be
loaded using the link-editor
.Xr ld 1 .
.Pp
A file created with
.Nm ar
begins with the magic string
.Dq !<arch>\en .
The rest of the archive is made up of objects, each of which is composed
of a header for a file, a possible file name, and the file contents.
The header is portable between machine architectures and, if the file
contents are printable, the archive is itself printable.
.Pp
The header is made up of six variable length ASCII fields, followed by a
two character trailer.
The fields are the object name (16 characters), the file last modification
time (12 characters), the user and group IDs (each 6 characters), the file
mode (8 characters) and the file size (10 characters).
All numeric fields are in decimal, except for the file mode which is in
octal.
.Pp
The modification time is the file
.Fa st_mtime
field, i.e.,
.Dv CUT
seconds since
the Epoch.
The user and group IDs are the file
.Fa st_uid
and
.Fa st_gid
fields.
The file mode is the file
.Fa st_mode
field.
The file size is the file
.Fa st_size
field.
The two-byte trailer is the string "\`\en".
.Pp
Only the name field has any provision for overflow.
If any file name is more than 16 characters in length or contains an
embedded space, the string "#1/" followed by the ASCII length of the
name is written in the name field.
The file size (stored in the archive header) is incremented by the length
of the name.
The name is then written immediately following the archive header.
.Pp
Any unused characters in any of these fields are written as space
characters.
If any fields are their particular maximum number of characters in
length, there will be no separation between the fields.
.Pp
Objects in the archive are always an even number of bytes long; files
which are an odd number of bytes long are padded with a newline
.Pq Ql \en
character, although the size in the header does not reflect this.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ar 1 ,
.Xr stat 2
.Sh STANDARDS
No archive format is currently specified by any standard.
.At V
has historically distributed archives in a different format from
all of the above.
.Sh HISTORY
There have been at least four
.Nm ar
formats.
The first was denoted by the leading magic number 0177555 (stored as
type
.Vt int ) .
These archives were almost certainly created on a 16-bit machine, and
contain headers made up of five fields.
The fields are the object name (8 characters), the file last modification
time (type
.Vt long ) ,
the user ID (type
.Vt char ) ,
the file mode (type
.Vt char )
and the file size (type
.Vt unsigned int ) .
Files were padded to an even number of bytes.
.Pp
The second was denoted by the leading magic number 0177545 (stored as
type
.Vt int ) .
These archives may have been created on either 16 or 32-bit machines, and
contain headers made up of six fields.
The fields are the object name (14 characters), the file last modification
time (type
.Vt long ) ,
the user and group IDs (each type
.Vt char ) ,
the file mode (type
.Vt int )
and the file size (type
.Vt long ) .
Files were padded to an even number of bytes.
.\" For more information on converting from this format see
.\" .Xr arcv 8 .
.Pp
The current archive format (without support for long character names and
names with embedded spaces) was introduced in
.Bx 4.0 .
The headers were the same as the current format, with the exception that
names longer than 16 characters were truncated, and names with embedded
spaces (and often trailing spaces) were not supported.
It has been extended for these reasons,
as described above.
This format first appeared in
.Bx 4.4 .
