.\" Copyright (c) 2014 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by Edward Tomasz Napierala under sponsorship
.\" from the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 2, 2017
.Dt AUTOFS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm autofs
.Nd "automounter filesystem"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options AUTOFS"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
autofs_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver is the kernel component of the automounter infrastructure.
Its job is to pass mount requests to the
.Xr automountd 8
daemon, and pause the processes trying to access the automounted filesystem
until the mount is completed.
It is mounted by the
.Xr automount 8 .
.Sh OPTIONS
These options are available when
mounting
.Nm
file systems:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm master_options
Mount options for all filesystems specified in the map entry.
.It Cm master_prefix
Filesystem mountpoint prefix.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va vfs.autofs.debug
Verbosity level for log messages from the
.Nm
driver.
Set to 0 to disable logging or 1 to warn about potential problems.
Larger values enable debugging output.
Defaults to 1.
.It Va vfs.autofs.interruptible
Set to 1 to allow mount requests to be interrupted by signal.
Defaults to 1.
.It Va vfs.autofs.retry_delay
Number of seconds before retrying mount requests.
Defaults to 1.
.It Va vfs.autofs.retry_attempts
Number of attempts before failing mount.
Defaults to 3.
.It Va vfs.autofs.cache
Number of seconds to wait before reinvoking
.Xr automountd 8
for any given file or directory.
Defaults to 600.
.It Va vfs.autofs.timeout
Number of seconds to wait for
.Xr automountd 8
to handle the mount request.
Defaults to 30.
.It Va vfs.autofs.mount_on_stat
Set to 1 to trigger mount on
.Xr stat 2
on mountpoint.
Defaults to 0.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To unmount all mounted
.Nm
filesystems:
.Pp
.Dl "umount -At autofs"
.Pp
To mount
.Nm
filesystems specified in
.Xr auto_master 5 :
.Pp
.Dl "automount"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr auto_master 5 ,
.Xr automount 8 ,
.Xr automountd 8 ,
.Xr autounmountd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
was developed by
.An Edward Tomasz Napierala Aq Mt trasz@FreeBSD.org
under sponsorship from the FreeBSD Foundation.
