.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Maksim Yevmenkin <m_evmenkin@yahoo.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 27, 2008
.Dt BLUETOOTH.DEVICE.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bluetooth.device.conf
.Nd Bluetooth device configuration file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Bluetooth device configuration framework provides ability to adjust certain
Bluetooth device parameters on per-device basis.
.Pp
Bluetooth device configuration files are plain text files that should conform
to basic
.Xr sh 1
syntax.
Even though Bluetooth device are not exactly shell scripts,
they are parsed and passed through shell
.Ic eval
command.
This makes it possible to use various shell tricks in the Bluetooth device
configuration files.
.Pp
The
.Pa /etc/rc.d/bluetooth
script is used to start and stop Bluetooth devices.
This script is not executed by default when system boots.
It is called by
.Xr devd 8
in response to Bluetooth device arrival and departure events.
It is possible to execute this script by hand if required.
The script accepts Bluetooth device driver name as an extra parameter.
.Pp
The system wide Bluetooth device configuration file is called
.Pa /etc/defaults/\:bluetooth.device.conf .
Configuration parameters set in the system wide Bluetooth device configuration
file apply to every Bluetooth device connected to the system.
.Pp
Configuration parameters overrides for the specific Bluetooth device
should be placed in the
.Pa /etc/bluetooth/ Ns Ar DEVICE_DRIVER_NAME Ns Pa .conf
file.
Where
.Ar DEVICE_DRIVER_NAME
is the device driver name of the Bluetooth device.
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for each
variable that can be set in a Bluetooth device configuration file.
.Bl -tag -width indent-two
.It Va authentication_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The
.Va authentication_enable
parameter controls if the device requires to authenticate the remote device
at connection setup.
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the device will try to authenticate the other device at connection setup.
Bluetooth authentication requests are handled by
.Xr hcsecd 8
daemon.
.It Va class
.Pq Vt str
The
.Va class
parameter is used to indicate the capabilities of the device to
other devices.
For more details see
.Dq Assigned Numbers - Bluetooth Baseband
document.
.It Va connectable
.Pq Vt bool
The
.Va connectable
parameter controls whether or not the device should periodically scan for
page attempts from other devices.
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the device will periodically scan for page attempts from other devices.
.It Va discoverable
.Pq Vt bool
The
.Va discoverable
parameter controls whether or not the device should periodically scan for
inquiry requests from other devices.
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the device will periodically scan for inquiry requests from other devices.
.It Va encryption_mode
.Pq Vt str
The
.Va encryption_mode
parameter controls if the device requires encryption to the remote device
at connection setup.
At connection setup, only the devices with the
.Va authentication_enable
parameter enabled and
.Va encryption_mode
parameter enabled will try to encrypt the connection to the other device.
Possible values are
.Dq Li NONE
encryption disabled,
.Dq Li P2P
encryption for only point-to-point packets,
or
.Dq Li ALL
encryption for both point-to-point and broadcast packets.
.It Va hci_debug_level
.Pq Vt int
HCI node debug level.
Higher values mean more verbose output.
.It Va l2cap_debug_level
.Pq Vt int
L2CAP node debug level.
Higher values mean more verbose output.
.It Va local_name
.Pq Vt str
The
.Va local_name
parameter provides the ability to modify the user friendly name for the device.
.It Va role_switch
.Pq Vt bool
The
.Va role_switch
parameter controls whether the local device should perform role switch.
By default, if role switch is supported, the local device will try to perform
role switch and become Master on incoming connection.
Some devices do not support role switch and thus incoming connections from
such devices will fail.
If
.Va role switch
is disabled then accepting device will remain Slave.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/defaults/bluetooth.device.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/defaults/bluetooth.device.conf
.It Pa /etc/rc.d/bluetooth
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The
.Pa /etc/bluetooth/ubt0.conf
file should be used to specify configuration parameters overrides for the
first USB Bluetooth device
(device driver name is
.Li ubt0 ) .
.Pp
The
.Pa /etc/bluetooth/ubt1.conf
file should be used to specify configuration parameters overrides for the
second USB Bluetooth device.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ng_bt3c 4 ,
.Xr ng_h4 4 ,
.Xr ng_hci 4 ,
.Xr ng_l2cap 4 ,
.Xr ng_ubt 4 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr hccontrol 8 ,
.Xr hcsecd 8 ,
.Xr l2control 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Maksim Yevmenkin Aq Mt m_evmenkin@yahoo.com
