.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Daniel Gerzo <danger@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd May 13, 2007
.Dt BOOT.CONFIG 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm boot.config
.Nd "Configuration file for the boot blocks"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains options for the
.Fx
boot block code.
.Pp
When the
.Fx
boot loader runs, it searches the
.Dq Li a
slice of the boot partition for a
.Nm
file (as a result, slices which are missing an
.Dq Li a
partition require user intervention during the boot process).
If the
.Nm
file is found, its contents are used as the default configuration
options for the boot block code and are echoed to the system console.
.Pp
A valid format of this file is to put BIOS drive number, a controller
type, a unit number, a partition, a kernel file name, and any other
valid
.Xr boot 8
option on a single line, as it is done at the
.Dq Li "boot:"
prompt.
.Pp
The options related to the boot image selection described below and all
the other options available for
.Nm
are documented in detail in the
.Xr boot 8
manual page.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /boot.config -compact
.It Pa /boot.config
parameters for the boot blocks (optional)
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "-P" > /boot.config
.Ed
.Pp
will activate the serial console of
.Fx .
.Pp
The command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "1:ad(1,a)/boot/loader" > /boot.config
.Ed
.Pp
will instruct the second stage of
.Xr boot 8
on the first disk to boot with the third
.Xr boot 8
stage from the second disk.
.Pp
The command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "1:ad(1,a)/boot/loader -P" > /boot.config
.Ed
.Pp
will do both of the above.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr boot 8 ,
.Xr loader 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Daniel Gerzo Aq Mt danger@FreeBSD.org .
