.\" $OpenBSD: bsd.regress.mk.5,v 1.27 2025/09/17 08:52:05 tb Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Anil Madhavapeddy
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Marc Espie
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 17 2025 $
.Dt BSD.REGRESS.MK 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bsd.regress.mk
.Nd regression test master Makefile fragment
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd .include <bsd.regress.mk>
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
holds the standard routines used by the source regression tests.
Some variables and targets are for its internal use only.
The rest are documented here.
.Pp
Since this file also includes
.Nm bsd.prog.mk ,
all of the usual
.Ox
Makefile variables may be used to build the regression
test programs.
.Sh TARGETS
.Bl -tag -width regress
.It Cm depend
Build any dependencies required to carry out the current set
of regression tests.
.It Cm regress
Executes the regression targets defined in the Makefile.
If a test fails, the line
.Qq FAILED
is printed to the standard output.
By default, execution stops after the first test failure and
.Sy make Cm regress
exits with a non-zero status.
.It Cm run-regress-*
Runs an individual regression test.
If the exit status of the program indicates an error or timeout,
then a failure is logged, otherwise the test is marked as a success.
.El
.Sh VARIABLES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev REGRESS_CLEANUP
If this variable is set, it contains a target that is executed
after all regress targets.
.It Ev REGRESS_EXPECTED_FAILURES
Targets which are expected to fail.
Specifically: sometimes tests are added for features that should be
supported eventually, but are somewhat complicated to fix right away.
.It Ev REGRESS_FAIL_EARLY
If this variable is set to anything but
.Dq no ,
the
.Cm regress
target will abort as soon as a test fails.
Defaults to
.Dq yes
unless
.Ev REGRESS_LOG
is set.
.It Ev REGRESS_LOG
Points to the fully-qualified path of a file to which regression
results are appended.
Defaults to
.Pa /dev/null .
If set to any other path,
.Ev REGRESS_FAIL_EARLY
defaults to
.Dq no .
.It Ev REGRESS_ROOT_TARGETS
Targets for which root access is required to run the test.
The
.Ev SUDO
variable should be used in the test parts that require root.
See also
.Ev SUDO .
.It Ev REGRESS_SETUP
If this variable is set, it contains a target that is executed
before each regress target.
Regress targets depend on this one to enforce setup.
.It Ev REGRESS_SETUP_ONCE
If this variable is set, it contains a target that is executed
once before all regress targets.
Regress targets depend on a stamp file generated during setup.
.It Ev REGRESS_SKIP_SLOW
If this variable is not empty, skip over all the regression
tests which have been marked as being 'slow' using the
.Ev REGRESS_SLOW_TARGETS
variable.
.It Ev REGRESS_SKIP_TARGETS
Targets which are unconditionally skipped.
.It Ev REGRESS_SLOW_TARGETS
Targets which are defined as 'slow'.
All of these tests can be skipped by setting the
.Ev REGRESS_SKIP_SLOW
variable.
.It Ev REGRESS_TARGETS
Targets which are invoked to run the set of regression tests
for this Makefile.
Defaults to
.Cm run-regress-${PROG} .
.It Ev SUDO
Location of a command used to switch to root for certain
test targets which require it.
See
.Xr doas 1 .
.El
.Pp
Some variables are intended to be set at runtime in the environment
or in
.Xr mk.conf 5 ,
but not in the regress Makefile itself.
.Sh GUIDELINES
If an individual test passes,
.Sy make Ar testname
should return with an exit status of 0.
If it fails, it should return with a non-zero exit status.
.Pp
If a test cannot be executed because a package is not installed or
some environment variable is not set,
.Sy make Ar testname
should print
.Qq SKIPPED
to stdout and exit with status 0.
To skip everything, implement the
.Cm regress
target with a command that prints
.Qq SKIPPED .
.Pp
Some tests may require a special setup on the test machine that has
to be done manually before testing.
This requirement has to be documented in the Makefile or in a
.Pa README
file.
The test should find out whether the setup exists before running
and print
.Qq SKIPPED
and exit if it is missing.
.Pp
Tests should not fail because an intended feature has not been
implemented yet.
To avoid such false failures, a test should show the reason, print
.Qq DISABLED
to stdout and exit with status 0.
.Pp
Tests must be able to run with an
.Pa obj
directory.
In case the test is not linked to the build or the tester forgot
to run
.Sy make Cm obj
before, this directory or symlink may not exist.
Then the test should run anyway.
.Pp
Tests are executed with
.Sy make Cm regress ,
but running
.Sy make Cm all
or
.Sy make
should have the same effect.
Tests must be runnable by root, and may also succeed when run as a
regular user.
Tests must not assume they have a controlling tty,
to allow them to be run by
.Xr cron 8 .
An individual regress test may create a pseudo tty if it needs one.
.Pp
Tests should use the binaries installed and the kernel running on
the local system.
They may use environment variables to test alternative binaries or
remote kernels running on other machines.
In some cases a test may need binaries or libraries or object files
to be present in
.Pa /usr/obj/
that exist only after
.Sy make Cm build
was run in
.Pa /usr/src/ .
The test must not assume that they have already been built, but
should run
.Sy make
in the appropriate source directory as a dependency.
For missing generated source or header files a target called
.Sy make Cm generated
is common.
The
.Pa /usr/src/
tree can be found with a relative path or with the
.Ev BSDSRCDIR
variable.
.Pp
Tests should generally not set or modify
.Ev MALLOC_OPTIONS
unless it is testing specific behaviour that depends on a particular
flag or combination of flags.
When running tests, the appropriate sysctl
.Pq vm.malloc_conf
could be used instead.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5
.Sh HISTORY
The regression system originally came from
.Nx ,
with many tests added by
.Ox
since.
The current Makefile framework was written by Artur Grabowski
and Marc Espie for
.Ox 3.1 .
