.\"	$OpenBSD: cargo-module.5,v 1.10 2025/01/13 18:20:47 kirill Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Marc Espie
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Daniel Jakots
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 13 2025 $
.Dt CARGO-MODULE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cargo-module
.Nd devel/cargo port module
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents the behavior of setting
.Li MODULES=devel/cargo
in the
.Xr ports 7
tree.
.Pp
Automates download and compilation of dependencies of a Rust project using
.Xr cargo 1 .
.Pp
During
.Cm fetch ,
static dependencies ("crates") listed in
.Ev MODCARGO_CRATES
are downloaded using
.Ev MODCARGO_DIST_SUBDIR
as
.Ev DIST_SUBDIR .
.Pp
During
.Cm post-extract ,
crates defined in
.Ev MODCARGO_CRATES
are moved to the
.Ev MODCARGO_VENDOR_DIR
directory.
.Pp
During
.Cm post-patch ,
crate-metadata are generated using
.Pa devel/cargo-generate-vendor .
.Pp
With
.Ev CONFIGURE_STYLE
set to
.Sq cargo ,
cargo is configured to use
.Ev MODCARGO_VENDOR_DIR
instead of the standard crates-io network source.
Finally, any crates listed in
.Ev MODCARGO_CRATES_UPDATE
are updated.
.Pp
.Ev MODCARGO_RUSTFLAGS
can be used to pass custom flags to all
.Xr rustc 1
invocations.
.Pp
.Pa lang/rust
is added to
.Ev MODULES ,
and
.Pa devel/cargo-generate-vendor
is added to
.Ev BUILD_DEPENDS .
.Pp
This module defines:
.Bl -tag -width MODCARGO_INSTALL_TARGET_PATHS
.It Ev MODCARGO_CARGOTOML
Path to cargo manifest.
Defaults to
.Pa ${WRKSRC}/Cargo.toml .
.It Ev MODCARGO_CARGOLOCK
Path to
.Pa Cargo.lock ,
which is used only by the
.Cm modcargo-gen-crates
target.
Defaults to
.Pa ${MODCARGO_CARGOTOML:toml=lock} .
.It Ev MODCARGO_CRATES
Crates that will be downloaded by the module.
.It Ev MODCARGO_CRATES_UPDATE
List of crates to update, overriding the version listed in Cargo.lock.
.It Ev MODCARGO_FEATURES
List of features to be used when building.
.It Ev MODCARGO_INSTALL_TARGET_PATHS
List of paths to pass to
.Cm cargo install
instead of
.Pa \&. .
Needs to be set for some virtual manifests.
.It Ev MODCARGO_VENDOR_DIR
Name of the local directory for vendoring crates.
Defaults to
.Pa ${WRKSRC}/modcargo-crates .
.It Ev MODCARGO_WANTLIB
Architecture-specific
.Ev WANTLIB
entries required by all Rust code.
It is a copy of
.Ev MODRUST_WANTLIB
provided for simplicity.
.El
.Pp
This module adds three
.Xr make 1
targets:
.Bl -tag -width modcargo-gen-crates-licenses
.It Cm modcargo-metadata
Rerun the generation of crates' metadata.
.It Cm modcargo-gen-crates
Generate the
.Ev MODCARGO_CRATES
list from Cargo.lock (a preliminary crates list is not required).
.It Cm modcargo-gen-crates-licenses
Generate the
.Ev MODCARGO_CRATES
list with license information from crates present in the
.Ev MODCARGO_VENDOR_DIR
directory.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port-modules 5
