.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Roland Smith <rsmith@xs4all.nl>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 21, 2010
.Dt DEVFS.RULES 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm devfs.rules
.Nd devfs configuration information
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file provides an easy way to create and apply
.Xr devfs 8
rules, even for devices that are not available at boot.
.Pp
For devices available at boot, see
.Xr devfs.conf 5 .
.Pp
The format of this file is simple.
Empty lines and lines beginning with a hash sign
.Pq Ql #
are ignored.
A line between brackets denotes the start of a ruleset.
In the brackets should be the name of the ruleset and its number,
separated by an equal sign.
.Pp
Other lines are rule specifications as documented in
.Xr devfs 8 ,
in the section
.Sx "Rule Specification" .
These lines are prepended with
.Dq Li rule
and are passed to
.Xr devfs 8
by the startup scripts of the system.
It is important to put path elements that contain
.Xr glob 3
special characters between quotes.
.Pp
Rulesets should have a unique name and number.
.Pp
All rules that follow a ruleset declaration belong to that ruleset, until a
new ruleset is started.
.Pp
One custom ruleset has to be enabled in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf ,
otherwise it will not be applied to the
.Pa /dev
file system by the default system startup process.
For example, to enable a
.Dq Li localrules
ruleset for the
.Pa /dev
file system, you would have to use something like this in your
.Pa rc.conf
file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
devfs_system_ruleset="localrules"
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact -width Pa
.It Pa /etc/defaults/devfs.rules
Default
.Nm
configuration file.
.It Pa /etc/devfs.rules
Local
.Nm
configuration file.
Rulesets in here override those in
.Pa /etc/defaults/devfs.rules
with the same ruleset number, otherwise the two files are effectively merged.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To make all the partitions of
.Xr da 4
devices readable and writable by their owner and the
.Dq Li usb
group, the following rule may be used:
.Pp
.Dl "[localrules=10]"
.Dl "add path 'da*s*' mode 0660 group usb"
.Pp
The first line declares and starts a new ruleset, with the name
.Va localrules
and the number 10.
.Pp
To give
.Xr usbconfig 8
and
.Xr libusb 3
enabled applications permission to all usb devices for their owner and the
.Dq Li usb
group, a similar rule may be used:
.Pp
.Dl "add path 'usb/*' mode 0660 group usb"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr glob 3 ,
.Xr devfs 5 ,
.Xr devfs.conf 5 ,
.Xr devfs 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Roland Smith Aq Mt rsmith@xs4all.nl .
