.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)dir.5	8.3 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 14, 2018
.Dt DIR 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dir ,
.Nm dirent
.Nd directory file format
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In dirent.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Directories provide a convenient hierarchical method of grouping
files while obscuring the underlying details of the storage medium.
A directory file is differentiated from a plain file
by a flag in its
.Xr inode 5
entry.
It consists of records (directory entries) each of which contains
information about a file and a pointer to the file itself.
Directory entries may contain other directories
as well as plain files; such nested directories are referred to as
subdirectories.
A hierarchy of directories and files is formed in this manner
and is called a file system (or referred to as a file system tree).
.\" An entry in this tree,
.\" nested or not nested,
.\" is a pathname.
.Pp
Each directory file contains two special directory entries; one is a pointer
to the directory itself
called dot
.Ql .\&
and the other a pointer to its parent directory called dot-dot
.Ql \&.. .
Dot and dot-dot
are valid pathnames, however,
the system root directory
.Ql / ,
has no parent and dot-dot points to itself like dot.
.Pp
File system nodes are ordinary directory files on which has
been grafted a file system object, such as a physical disk or a
partitioned area of such a disk.
(See
.Xr mount 2
and
.Xr mount 8 . )
.Pp
The directory entry format is defined in the file
.In sys/dirent.h
(which should not be included directly by applications):
.Bd -literal
#ifndef	_SYS_DIRENT_H_
#define	_SYS_DIRENT_H_

#include <machine/ansi.h>

/*
 * The dirent structure defines the format of directory entries returned by
 * the getdirentries(2) system call.
 *
 * A directory entry has a struct dirent at the front of it, containing its
 * inode number, the length of the entry, and the length of the name
 * contained in the entry.  These are followed by the name padded to a 8
 * byte boundary with null bytes.  All names are guaranteed null terminated.
 * The maximum length of a name in a directory is MAXNAMLEN.
 * Explicit pad is added between the last member of the header and
 * d_name, to avoid having the ABI padding in the end of dirent on
 * LP64 arches.  There is code depending on d_name being last.  Also,
 * keeping this pad for ILP32 architectures simplifies compat32 layer.
 */

struct dirent {
	ino_t      d_fileno;		/* file number of entry */
	off_t      d_off;		/* directory offset of the next entry */
	__uint16_t d_reclen;		/* length of this record */
	__uint8_t  d_type;		/* file type, see below */
	__uint8_t  d_namlen;		/* length of string in d_name */
	__uint32_t d_pad0;
#if __BSD_VISIBLE
#define	MAXNAMLEN	255
	char	d_name[MAXNAMLEN + 1];	/* name must be no longer than this */
#else
	char	d_name[255 + 1];	/* name must be no longer than this */
#endif
};

/*
 * File types
 */
#define	DT_UNKNOWN	 0
#define	DT_FIFO		 1
#define	DT_CHR		 2
#define	DT_DIR		 4
#define	DT_BLK		 6
#define	DT_REG		 8
#define	DT_LNK		10
#define	DT_SOCK		12
#define	DT_WHT		14

/*
 * Convert between stat structure types and directory types.
 */
#define	IFTODT(mode)	(((mode) & 0170000) >> 12)
#define	DTTOIF(dirtype)	((dirtype) << 12)

/*
 * The _GENERIC_DIRSIZ macro gives the minimum record length which will hold
 * the directory entry.  This returns the amount of space in struct direct
 * without the d_name field, plus enough space for the name with a terminating
 * null byte (dp->d_namlen+1), rounded up to a 8 byte boundary.
 *
 * XXX although this macro is in the implementation namespace, it requires
 * a manifest constant that is not.
 */
#define	_GENERIC_DIRLEN(namlen)					\
	((__offsetof(struct dirent, d_name) + (namlen) + 1 + 7) & ~7)
#define	_GENERIC_DIRSIZ(dp)	_GENERIC_DIRLEN((dp)->d_namlen)
#endif /* __BSD_VISIBLE */

#ifdef _KERNEL
#define	GENERIC_DIRSIZ(dp)	_GENERIC_DIRSIZ(dp)
#endif

#endif /* !_SYS_DIRENT_H_ */
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fs 5 ,
.Xr inode 5
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
file format appeared in
.At v7 .
.Sh BUGS
The usage of the member d_type of struct dirent is unportable as it is
.Fx Ns -specific .
It also may fail on certain file systems, for example the cd9660 file system.
