.\" Copyright (c) 1995
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 11, 2004
.Dt EUI64 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm eui64
.Nd IEEE EUI-64 address database
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
database contains information regarding known IEEE EUI-64s of hosts.
The data is stored in a file called
.Pa /etc/eui64
in the following format:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Em EUI-64 host-name
.Ed
.Pp
Items are separated by any number of blanks and/or
tab characters.
A
.Ql #
at the start of a line indicates the
beginning of a comment that extends to the end of the line.
Valid lines may also contain comments.
A
.Ql +
at the start of a line will cause the
.Xr eui64 3
library functions to use data stored in the
NIS
.Pa eui64.byname
and
.Pa eui64.byid
maps in addition to the data in the
.Pa /etc/eui64
file.
.Pp
An EUI-64 is expressed in
.Tn ASCII
form as
.Qq x-x-x-x-x-x-x-x
where
.Ar x
is a hexadecimal value between 0x00 and 0xFF.
The address values
should be in network order.
Hostnames specified in the
.Pa /etc/eui64
database should correspond to entries in the
.Xr hosts 5
file.
.\" .Pp
.\" The
.\" .Fn eui64_line
.\" function in the standard C library can be used to break individual
.\" lines in the
.\" .Pa /etc/eui64
.\" database into their individual components: a binary EUI-64 is
.\" stored as an
.\" .Pa eui64_addr
.\" structure, and a hostname stored as a character string.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/eui64" -compact
.It Pa /etc/eui64
The
.Nm
file resides in
.Pa /etc .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr eui64 3 ,
.Xr yp 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
format is based on the
.Xr ethers 5
format.
