.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Craig Rodrigues
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS DOCUMENTATION IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 30, 2018
.Dt EXT2FS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ext2fs
.Nd "ext2/ext3/ext4 file system"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To link into the kernel:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options EXT2FS"
.Ed
.Pp
To load as a kernel loadable module:
.Pp
.Dl "kldload ext2fs"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver will permit the
.Fx
kernel to access
ext2
file systems and its derivatives.
It currently implements most of the features required by
.Em ext3
and
.Em ext4
file systems.
Support for Extended Attributes in
.Em ext4
is experimental.
Journalling and encryption are currently not supported.
.Sh EXAMPLES
To mount a
.Nm
volume located on
.Pa /dev/ada1s1 :
.Pp
.Dl "mount -t ext2fs /dev/ada1s1 /mnt"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nmount 2 ,
.Xr unmount 2 ,
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr mount 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
kernel implementation is derived from code written,
or modified,
by
.An Godmar Back
using the UFS CSRG sources for CMU Mach.
.Pp
.An John Dyson
did the initial port to
.Fx .
.An Aditya Sarawgi
merged important parts of the allocation code from a clean-room
.Nx
implementation.
.An Zheng Liu
and
.An Fedor Upurov
implemented the read and write support respectively for
.Em ext4
filesystems.
The
.Fx
community has contributed a huge amount of modifications.
.Pp
The initial version of this manual page was written by
.An Craig Rodrigues Aq Mt rodrigc@FreeBSD.org .
