.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)fs.5	8.2 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 16, 2017
.Dt FS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fs ,
.Nm inode
.Nd format of file system volume
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In ufs/ffs/fs.h
.Pp
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/lock.h
.In sys/extattr.h
.In sys/acl.h
.In ufs/ufs/quota.h
.In ufs/ufs/dinode.h
.In ufs/ufs/extattr.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The files
.In fs.h
and
.In inode.h
declare several structures, defined variables and macros
which are used to create and manage the underlying format of
file system objects on random access devices (disks).
.Pp
The block size and number of blocks which
comprise a file system are parameters of the file system.
Sectors beginning at
.Dv BBLOCK
and continuing for
.Dv BBSIZE
are used
for a disklabel and for some hardware primary
and secondary bootstrapping programs.
.Pp
The actual file system begins at sector
.Dv SBLOCK
with the
.Em super-block
that is of size
.Dv SBLOCKSIZE .
The following structure describes the super-block and is
from the file
.In ufs/ffs/fs.h :
.Bd -literal
/*
 * Super block for an FFS filesystem.
 */
struct fs {
	int32_t	 fs_firstfield;	   /* historic filesystem linked list, */
	int32_t	 fs_unused_1;      /*     used for incore super blocks */
	int32_t	 fs_sblkno;        /* offset of super-block in filesys */
	int32_t	 fs_cblkno;        /* offset of cyl-block in filesys */
	int32_t	 fs_iblkno;        /* offset of inode-blocks in filesys */
	int32_t	 fs_dblkno;        /* offset of first data after cg */
	int32_t	 fs_old_cgoffset;  /* cylinder group offset in cylinder */
	int32_t	 fs_old_cgmask;    /* used to calc mod fs_ntrak */
	int32_t  fs_old_time;      /* last time written */
	int32_t	 fs_old_size;      /* number of blocks in fs */
	int32_t	 fs_old_dsize;     /* number of data blocks in fs */
	int32_t	 fs_ncg;           /* number of cylinder groups */
	int32_t	 fs_bsize;         /* size of basic blocks in fs */
	int32_t	 fs_fsize;         /* size of frag blocks in fs */
	int32_t	 fs_frag;          /* number of frags in a block in fs */
/* these are configuration parameters */
	int32_t	 fs_minfree;       /* minimum percentage of free blocks */
	int32_t	 fs_old_rotdelay;  /* num of ms for optimal next block */
	int32_t	 fs_old_rps;       /* disk revolutions per second */
/* these fields can be computed from the others */
	int32_t	 fs_bmask;         /* ``blkoff'' calc of blk offsets */
	int32_t	 fs_fmask;         /* ``fragoff'' calc of frag offsets */
	int32_t	 fs_bshift;        /* ``lblkno'' calc of logical blkno */
	int32_t	 fs_fshift;        /* ``numfrags'' calc number of frags */
/* these are configuration parameters */
	int32_t	 fs_maxcontig;     /* max number of contiguous blks */
	int32_t	 fs_maxbpg;        /* max number of blks per cyl group */
/* these fields can be computed from the others */
	int32_t	 fs_fragshift;     /* block to frag shift */
	int32_t	 fs_fsbtodb;       /* fsbtodb and dbtofsb shift constant */
	int32_t	 fs_sbsize;        /* actual size of super block */
	int32_t	 fs_spare1[2];     /* old fs_csmask */
	                           /* old fs_csshift */
	int32_t	 fs_nindir;        /* value of NINDIR */
	int32_t	 fs_inopb;         /* value of INOPB */
	int32_t	 fs_old_nspf;      /* value of NSPF */
/* yet another configuration parameter */
	int32_t	 fs_optim;         /* optimization preference, see below */
	int32_t	 fs_old_npsect;    /* # sectors/track including spares */
	int32_t	 fs_old_interleave; /* hardware sector interleave */
	int32_t	 fs_old_trackskew; /* sector 0 skew, per track */
	int32_t	 fs_id[2];         /* unique filesystem id */
/* sizes determined by number of cylinder groups and their sizes */
	int32_t	 fs_old_csaddr;	   /* blk addr of cyl grp summary area */
	int32_t	 fs_cssize;        /* size of cyl grp summary area */
	int32_t	 fs_cgsize;        /* cylinder group size */
	int32_t	 fs_spare2;        /* old fs_ntrak */
	int32_t	 fs_old_nsect;     /* sectors per track */
	int32_t  fs_old_spc;       /* sectors per cylinder */
	int32_t	 fs_old_ncyl;      /* cylinders in filesystem */
	int32_t	 fs_old_cpg;       /* cylinders per group */
	int32_t	 fs_ipg;           /* inodes per group */
	int32_t	 fs_fpg;           /* blocks per group * fs_frag */
/* this data must be re-computed after crashes */
	struct	csum fs_old_cstotal; /* cylinder summary information */
/* these fields are cleared at mount time */
	int8_t   fs_fmod;          /* super block modified flag */
	int8_t   fs_clean;         /* filesystem is clean flag */
	int8_t 	 fs_ronly;         /* mounted read-only flag */
	int8_t   fs_old_flags;     /* old FS_ flags */
	u_char	 fs_fsmnt[MAXMNTLEN]; /* name mounted on */
	u_char	 fs_volname[MAXVOLLEN]; /* volume name */
	uint64_t fs_swuid;         /* system-wide uid */
	int32_t  fs_pad;           /* due to alignment of fs_swuid */
/* these fields retain the current block allocation info */
	int32_t	 fs_cgrotor;       /* last cg searched */
	void 	*fs_ocsp[NOCSPTRS]; /* padding; was list of fs_cs buffers */
	uint8_t *fs_contigdirs;    /* # of contiguously allocated dirs */
	struct	csum *fs_csp;      /* cg summary info buffer for fs_cs */
	int32_t	*fs_maxcluster;    /* max cluster in each cyl group */
	u_int	*fs_active;        /* used by snapshots to track fs */
	int32_t	 fs_old_cpc;       /* cyl per cycle in postbl */
	int32_t	 fs_maxbsize;      /* maximum blocking factor permitted */
	int64_t	 fs_unrefs;        /* number of unreferenced inodes */
	int64_t	 fs_sparecon64[16]; /* old rotation block list head */
	int64_t	 fs_sblockloc;     /* byte offset of standard superblock */
	struct	csum_total fs_cstotal;  /* cylinder summary information */
	ufs_time_t fs_time;        /* last time written */
	int64_t	 fs_size;          /* number of blocks in fs */
	int64_t	 fs_dsize;         /* number of data blocks in fs */
	ufs2_daddr_t fs_csaddr;    /* blk addr of cyl grp summary area */
	int64_t	 fs_pendingblocks; /* blocks in process of being freed */
	int32_t	 fs_pendinginodes; /* inodes in process of being freed */
	int32_t	 fs_snapinum[FSMAXSNAP]; /* list of snapshot inode numbers */
	int32_t	 fs_avgfilesize;   /* expected average file size */
	int32_t	 fs_avgfpdir;      /* expected # of files per directory */
	int32_t	 fs_save_cgsize;   /* save real cg size to use fs_bsize */
	int32_t	 fs_sparecon32[26]; /* reserved for future constants */
	int32_t  fs_flags;         /* see FS_ flags below */
	int32_t	 fs_contigsumsize; /* size of cluster summary array */
	int32_t	 fs_maxsymlinklen; /* max length of an internal symlink */
	int32_t	 fs_old_inodefmt;  /* format of on-disk inodes */
	uint64_t fs_maxfilesize;   /* maximum representable file size */
	int64_t	 fs_qbmask;        /* ~fs_bmask for use with 64-bit size */
	int64_t	 fs_qfmask;        /* ~fs_fmask for use with 64-bit size */
	int32_t	 fs_state;         /* validate fs_clean field */
	int32_t	 fs_old_postblformat; /* format of positional layout tables */
	int32_t	 fs_old_nrpos;     /* number of rotational positions */
	int32_t	 fs_spare5[2];     /* old fs_postbloff */
	                           /* old fs_rotbloff */
	int32_t	 fs_magic;         /* magic number */
};

/*
 * Filesystem identification
 */
#define	FS_UFS1_MAGIC	0x011954    /* UFS1 fast filesystem magic number */
#define	FS_UFS2_MAGIC	0x19540119  /* UFS2 fast filesystem magic number */
#define	FS_OKAY		0x7c269d38  /* superblock checksum */
#define FS_42INODEFMT	-1      /* 4.2BSD inode format */
#define FS_44INODEFMT	2       /* 4.4BSD inode format */

/*
 * Preference for optimization.
 */
#define FS_OPTTIME	0	/* minimize allocation time */
#define FS_OPTSPACE	1	/* minimize disk fragmentation */
.Ed
.Pp
Each disk drive contains some number of file systems.
A file system consists of a number of cylinder groups.
Each cylinder group has inodes and data.
.Pp
A file system is described by its super-block, which in turn
describes the cylinder groups.
The super-block is critical
data and is replicated in each cylinder group to protect against
catastrophic loss.
This is done at file system creation
time and the critical
super-block data does not change, so the copies need not be
referenced further unless disaster strikes.
.Pp
Addresses stored in inodes are capable of addressing fragments
of `blocks'.
File system blocks of at most size
.Dv MAXBSIZE
can
be optionally broken into 2, 4, or 8 pieces, each of which is
addressable; these pieces may be
.Dv DEV_BSIZE ,
or some multiple of
a
.Dv DEV_BSIZE
unit.
.Pp
Large files consist of exclusively large data blocks.
To avoid
undue wasted disk space, the last data block of a small file is
allocated as only as many fragments of a large block as are
necessary.
The file system format retains only a single pointer
to such a fragment, which is a piece of a single large block that
has been divided.
The size of such a fragment is determinable from
information in the inode, using the
.Fn blksize fs ip lbn
macro.
.Pp
The file system records space availability at the fragment level;
to determine block availability, aligned fragments are examined.
.Pp
The root inode is the root of the file system.
Inode 0 cannot be used for normal purposes and
historically bad blocks were linked to inode 1,
thus the root inode is 2 (inode 1 is no longer used for
this purpose, however numerous dump tapes make this
assumption, so we are stuck with it).
.Pp
The
.Fa fs_minfree
element gives the minimum acceptable percentage of file system
blocks that may be free.
If the freelist drops below this level
only the super-user may continue to allocate blocks.
The
.Fa fs_minfree
element
may be set to 0 if no reserve of free blocks is deemed necessary,
however severe performance degradations will be observed if the
file system is run at greater than 90% full; thus the default
value of
.Fa fs_minfree
is 8%.
.Pp
Empirically the best trade-off between block fragmentation and
overall disk utilization at a loading of 90% comes with a
fragmentation of 8, thus the default fragment size is an eighth
of the block size.
.Pp
The element
.Fa fs_optim
specifies whether the file system should try to minimize the time spent
allocating blocks, or if it should attempt to minimize the space
fragmentation on the disk.
If the value of fs_minfree (see above) is less than 8%,
then the file system defaults to optimizing for space to avoid
running out of full sized blocks.
If the value of minfree is greater than or equal to 8%,
fragmentation is unlikely to be problematical, and
the file system defaults to optimizing for time.
.Pp
.Em Cylinder group related limits :
Each cylinder keeps track of the availability of blocks at different
rotational positions, so that sequential blocks can be laid out
with minimum rotational latency.
With the default of 8 distinguished
rotational positions, the resolution of the
summary information is 2ms for a typical 3600 rpm drive.
.Pp
The element
.Fa fs_old_rotdelay
gives the minimum number of milliseconds to initiate
another disk transfer on the same cylinder.
It is used in determining the rotationally optimal
layout for disk blocks within a file;
the default value for
.Fa fs_old_rotdelay
is 2ms.
.Pp
Each file system has a statically allocated number of inodes.
An inode is allocated for each
.Dv NBPI
bytes of disk space.
The inode allocation strategy is extremely conservative.
.Pp
.Dv MINBSIZE
is the smallest allowable block size.
With a
.Dv MINBSIZE
of 4096
it is possible to create files of size
2^32 with only two levels of indirection.
.Dv MINBSIZE
must be big enough to hold a cylinder group block,
thus changes to
.Pq Fa struct cg
must keep its size within
.Dv MINBSIZE .
Note that super-blocks are never more than size
.Dv SBLOCKSIZE .
.Pp
The path name on which the file system is mounted is maintained in
.Fa fs_fsmnt .
.Dv MAXMNTLEN
defines the amount of space allocated in
the super-block for this name.
The limit on the amount of summary information per file system
is defined by
.Dv MAXCSBUFS .
For a 4096 byte block size, it is currently parameterized for a
maximum of two million cylinders.
.Pp
Per cylinder group information is summarized in blocks allocated
from the first cylinder group's data blocks.
These blocks are read in from
.Fa fs_csaddr
(size
.Fa fs_cssize )
in addition to the super-block.
.Pp
.Sy N.B. :
.Fn sizeof "struct csum"
must be a power of two in order for
the
.Fn fs_cs
macro to work.
.Pp
The
.Em "Super-block for a file system" :
The size of the rotational layout tables
is limited by the fact that the super-block is of size
.Dv SBLOCKSIZE .
The size of these tables is
.Em inversely
proportional to the block
size of the file system.
The size of the tables is
increased when sector sizes are not powers of two,
as this increases the number of cylinders
included before the rotational pattern repeats
.Pq Fa fs_cpc .
The size of the rotational layout
tables is derived from the number of bytes remaining in
.Pq Fa struct fs .
.Pp
The number of blocks of data per cylinder group
is limited because cylinder groups are at most one block.
The inode and free block tables
must fit into a single block after deducting space for
the cylinder group structure
.Pq Fa struct cg .
.Pp
The
.Em Inode :
The inode is the focus of all file activity in the
.Ux
file system.
There is a unique inode allocated
for each active file,
each current directory, each mounted-on file,
text file, and the root.
An inode is `named' by its device/i-number pair.
For further information, see the include file
.In ufs/ufs/inode.h .
.Pp
The format of an external attribute is defined by the extattr structure:
.Bd -literal
struct extattr {
	uint32_t ea_length;	    /* length of this attribute */
	uint8_t	ea_namespace;	    /* name space of this attribute */
	uint8_t	ea_contentpadlen;   /* bytes of padding at end of attribute */
	uint8_t	ea_namelength;	    /* length of attribute name */
	char	ea_name[1];	    /* attribute name (NOT nul-terminated) */
	/* padding, if any, to align attribute content to 8 byte boundary */
	/* extended attribute content follows */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Several macros are defined to manipulate these structures.
Each macro takes a pointer to an extattr structure.
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv EXTATTR_CONTENT_SIZE(eap)"
.It Dv EXTATTR_NEXT(eap)
Returns a pointer to the next extended attribute following
.Fa eap .
.It Dv EXTATTR_CONTENT(eap)
Returns a pointer to the extended attribute content referenced by
.Fa eap .
.It Dv EXTATTR_CONTENT_SIZE(eap)
Returns the size of the extended attribute content referenced by
.Fa eap .
.El
.Pp
The following code identifies an ACL:
.Bd -literal
	if (eap->ea_namespace == EXTATTR_NAMESPACE_SYSTEM &&
            eap->ea_namelength == sizeof(POSIX1E_ACL_ACCESS_EXTATTR_NAME) - 1 &&
	    strncmp(eap->ea_name, POSIX1E_ACL_ACCESS_EXTATTR_NAME,
             sizeof(POSIX1E_ACL_ACCESS_EXTATTR_NAME) - 1) == 0) {
		aclp = EXTATTR_CONTENT(eap);
		acllen = EXTATTR_CONTENT_SIZE(eap);
		...
	}
.Ed
.Sh HISTORY
A super-block structure named filsys appeared in
.At v6 .
The file system described in this manual appeared
in
.Bx 4.2 .
