.\"	$OpenBSD: gnome-module.5,v 1.10 2025/08/16 16:43:06 daniel Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Marc Espie
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 16 2025 $
.Dt GNOME-MODULE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gnome-module
.Nd x11/gnome port module
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents the behavior of setting
.Li MODULES=x11/gnome
in the
.Xr ports 7
tree.
.Pp
This module has full support for the
.Ar gnu ,
.Ar simple ,
.Ar meson
and
.Ar cmake
CONFIGURE_STYLE.
.Pp
If
.Ev DIST_TUPLE
is set and the
.Em gnome
template is used, this module will set default values for
.Ev GNOME_PROJECT,
.Ev GNOME_VERSION,
.Ev WRKDIST,
and
.Ev EXTRACT_SUFX .
.Pp
If both
.Ev GNOME_PROJECT
and
.Ev GNOME_VERSION
are set, this module defines
.Ev DISTNAME ,
.Ev SITES ,
adds x11/gnome to
.Ev CATEGORIES
and
.Ev EXTRACT_SUFX
will default to .tar.xz if unset.
.Pp
Unless
.Li NO_BUILD=Yes ,
.Pa devel/gettext,-tools
is appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_BUILD_DEPENDS
for ports built using
.Xr meson 1
and
.Pa textproc/intltool
is appended to
.Ev MODULES
for other ports.
.Pp
.Ev USE_GMAKE
is set to "Yes".
.Pp
When CONFIGURE_STYLE is set to
.Ar gnu
or
.Ar simple ,
if none of
.Ev AUTOCONF_VERSION
nor
.Ev AUTOMAKE_VERSION
are defined, then "--disable-maintainer-mode" is appended to
.Ev CONFIGURE_ARGS .
When CONFIGURE_STYLE is set to
.Ar cmake ,
"-DENABLE_MAINTAINER_MODE=OFF" and -DSYSCONF_INSTALL_DIR=${SYSCONFDIR}
are appended to CONFIGURE_ARGS.
.Pp
MODGNOME_CPPFLAGS and MODGNOME_LDFLAGS can be used to add compiler and linker
flags.
.Li CPPFLAGS="-I${LOCALBASE}/include"
and
.Li LDFLAGS="-L${LOCALBASE}/lib"
are always appended to
.Ev CONFIGURE_ENV
unless MODGNOME_CPPFLAGS or MODGNOME_LDFLAGS is set to "no".
.Pp
Certain build/run dependencies and configure arguments and environment
can be set by appending desktop-file-utils, docbook, gi-docgen,
gobject-introspection, gtk-update-icon-cache, shared-mime-info,
vala and/or yelp to
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS .
They are disabled otherwise.
.Pp
If
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS
includes desktop-file-utils,
a dependency on
.Pa devel/desktop-file-utils
is appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_RUN_DEPENDS
and a link to /usr/bin/true is created under
.Pa ${WRKDIR}/bin/desktop-file-validate .
.Pp
If
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS
includes docbook,
.Pa textproc/docbook-xsl
is appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_BUILD_DEPENDS .
This option is used when the generation of the man pages included in the
source tarball requires docbook XML/SGML/XSL definitions and stylesheets.
.Pp
If
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS
includes gi-docgen,
.Pa textproc/gi-docgen
is appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_BUILD_DEPENDS .
This option is used to generate documentation using GI-Docgen.
.Pp
If
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS
includes gtk-update-icon-cache, a dependency on
.Pa x11/gtk+4,-guic
is appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_RUN_DEPENDS .
.Pp
If
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS
includes shared-mime-info, a dependency on
.Pa misc/shared-mime-info
is appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_RUN_DEPENDS
and a link to /usr/bin/true is created under
.Pa ${WRKDIR}/bin/update-mime-database .
.Pp
If
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS
includes yelp,
.Pa textproc/itstool
and
.Pa x11/gnome/doc-utils
are appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_BUILD_DEPENDS .
Furthermore,
.Pa x11/gnome/yelp
is appended to
.Ev MODGNOME_RUN_DEPENDS
if
.Ev MODGNOME_TOOLS
also contains "desktop-file-utils"
This option is to be used when any files are installed into
.Pa share/gnome/help/
or page files are installed into
.Pa share/help/ .
.Pp
.Ev MODGNOME_BUILD_DEPENDS
and
.Ev MODGNOME_RUN_DEPENDS
are appended to the
corresponding
.Ev BUILD_DEPENDS
and
.Ev RUN_DEPENDS .
.Pp
Some tools require the following tag in the PLIST:
.Pp
.Ar desktop-file-utils
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@tag update-desktop-database
.Ed
.Pp
.Ar gtk-update-icon-cache
($icon-theme is the theme directory)
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@tag gtk-update-icon-cache %D/share/icons/$icon-theme
.Ed
.Pp
.Ar shared-mime-info
.Bd -literal -offset indent
@tag update-mime-database
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port-modules 5
