.\"	$NetBSD: hesiod.conf.5,v 1.2 1999/01/25 22:37:06 lukem Exp $
.\"
.\" from: #Id: hesiod.conf.5,v 1.1 1996/12/08 21:36:38 ghudson Exp #
.\"
.\" Copyright 1996 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
.\" software and its documentation for any purpose and without
.\" fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright
.\" notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright
.\" notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
.\" documentation, and that the name of M.I.T. not be used in
.\" advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.
.\" M.I.T. makes no representations about the suitability of
.\" this software for any purpose.  It is provided "as is"
.\" without express or implied warranty.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 30, 1996
.Dt HESIOD.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hesiod.conf
.Nd "configuration file for the Hesiod library"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Nm
determines the behavior of the Hesiod library.
Blank lines and lines beginning with a
.Ql #
character are ignored.
All
other lines should be of the form
.Ar variable
=
.Ar value ,
where the
.Ar value
should be a single word.
Possible
.Ar variables
and
.Ar values
are:
.Bl -tag -width classes
.It Ic lhs
Specifies the domain prefix used for Hesiod queries.
In almost all cases, you should specify
.Dq Li lhs=.ns .
The default value if you do
not specify an lhs value is no domain prefix, which is not compatible
with most Hesiod domains.
.It Ic rhs
Specifies the default Hesiod domain; this value may be overridden by
the
.Ev HES_DOMAIN
environment variable.
You must specify an rhs line for the Hesiod
library to work properly.
.It Ic classes
Specifies which DNS classes Hesiod should do lookups in.
Possible values are
.Cm IN
(the preferred class) and
.Cm HS
(the deprecated class, still used by some sites).
You may specify both classes separated by
a comma to try one class first and then the other if no entry is
available in the first class.
The default value of the classes variable is
.Dq Li IN,HS .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hesiod 3
.Sh BUGS
The default value for
.Ic lhs
should probably be more reasonable.
