.\"     $OpenBSD: install.site.5,v 1.1 2021/11/08 16:12:09 kn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Klemens Nanni <kn@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 8 2021 $
.Dt INSTALL.SITE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm install.site ,
.Nm upgrade.site
.Nd OpenBSD installation and upgrade customization
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Ox
installer allows user-created sets and scripts to complement
and modify the files from a default install prior to rebooting.
.Pp
Like the official file sets, generic
.Pa site${ Ns Va VERSION Ns }.tgz
and
hostname-specific
.Pa site${ Ns Va VERSION Ns }-$( Ns Ic hostname Fl s Ns ).tgz
sets are
.Xr gzip 1
compressed
.Xr tar 1
archives rooted in
.Pa /
and untarred with the
.Fl xzphf
options.
.Pp
.Em siteXY
sets
must be included in
.Pa index.txt
in order to be fetched via
HTTP(S) and selectable in the installer.
.Pp
If they exist and are executable,
.Pa /install.site
and
.Pa /upgrade.site
are run at the end of the install and upgrade process, respectively, with
.Xr chroot 8
based at the system's root.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "site${VERSION}-$(hostname -s).tgz" -compact
.It Pa site${ Ns Va VERSION Ns }.tgz
Generic set.
.It Pa site${ Ns Va VERSION Ns }-$( Ns Ic hostname Fl s Ns ).tgz
Host-specific set.
.It Pa /upgrade.site
Generic post-upgrade script.
.It Pa /install.site
Generic post-install script.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Create
.Em site70
sets and update the index:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# tar -czhf site70.tgz generic/
# tar -czhf site70-puffy.tgz puffy/
# ls -lT > index.txt
.Ed
.Pp
Upgrade
.Xr packages 7
upon reboot after
.Xr sysupgrade 8
upgraded the system:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# cat <<- EOF >> /upgrade.site
	echo 'pkg_add -Iu' >>/etc/rc.firsttime
EOF
# chmod +x /upgrade.site
# sysupgrade
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr autoinstall 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr sysupgrade 8
