.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Matthew N. Dodd <winter@jurai.net>
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 16, 2013
.Dt LIBMAP.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm libmap.conf
.Nd "configuration file for dynamic object dependency mapping"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm libmap
functionality of
.Xr ld-elf.so.1 1
allows dynamic object dependencies to be mapped to arbitrary names.
.Pp
Each line in
.Pa /etc/libmap.conf
can have one of five forms:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ar origin Ar target
Whenever a dependency on
.Ar origin
is encountered while loading a dynamic object, use
.Ar target
instead of searching for
.Ar origin
in the normal library search paths.
.It Ar path1 Ar path2
When iterating through a library search path, replace any element that
matches
.Ar path1
exactly with
.Ar path2 .
.It Bq Ar constraint
Apply
.Ar constraint
to all subsequent mappings until the next constraint line or the end
of the file.
See the
.Sx Constraints
section for details.
.It Cm include Ar file
Parse the contents of
.Ar file
before continuing with the current file.
Nesting depth is limited only by available memory, but each file
encountered is processed only once, and loops are silently ignored.
.It Cm includedir Ar dir
Recurse through
.Ar dir
and parse the contents of any file that ends in
.Pa .conf
before continuing with the current file.
Nesting depth is limited only by available memory, but each directory
or file encountered is processed only once, and loops are silently
ignored.
.El
.Ss Constraints
Constrained mappings only apply when processing binaries or libraries
that satisfy the constraint.
There are three types of constraints:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Exact
The constraint is matched literally so that only an executable with an
identical fully qualified pathname will satisfy the constraint.
This means that the executable
.Pa /usr/bin/foo
will not satisfy the constraint
.Bq Pa /usr/bin/./foo ,
and vice-versa.
This is the default constraint type.
.It Basename
A constraint with no path is matched against the basename of the
executable.
For instance, the constraint
.Bq Pa foo
will match
.Pa /bin/foo ,
.Pa /usr/local/sbin/foo ,
or any other executable named
.Pa foo ,
no matter what directory it is in.
.It Directory
A constraint with a trailing slash is satisfied if the full pathname
begins with the constraint string.
For instance, the constraint
.Bq Pa /usr/bin/
will match any executable with a path starting with
.Pa /usr/bin/ .
.El
.Pp
Note that the constraints are matched against the path that was passed
as the first argument to whichever
.Xr exec 3
function was used to execute the binary in question.
Most programs executed from a shell are run without a full path, via
.Xr execvp 3
or similar, so the basename constraint type is the most useful.
.Pp
.Bf -symbolic
WARNING!
Constraints apply to all mappings until the next constraint or the end
of the file.
Hence, unconstrained mappings must be placed at the top of the file.
.Ef
.Ss ABI compatibility
On 64-bit architectures that provide 32-bit binary compatibility, the
mappings in
.Pa /etc/libmap.conf
apply only to 64-bit binaries.
Mappings for 32-bit binaries must be placed in
.Pa /etc/libmap32.conf .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/libmap32.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/libmap.conf
The libmap configuration file.
.It Pa /etc/libmap32.conf
The libmap configuration file for 32-bit binaries on 64-bit system.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
#
# origin		target
#
libc_r.so.6		libpthread.so.2	# Everything that uses 'libc_r'
libc_r.so		libpthread.so	# now uses 'libpthread'

[/tmp/mplayer]		# Test version of mplayer uses libc_r
libpthread.so.2		libc_r.so.6
libpthread.so		libc_r.so

[/usr/local/jdk1.4.1/]	# All Java 1.4.1 programs use libthr
			# This works because "javavms" executes
			# programs with the full pathname
libpthread.so.2		libthr.so.2
libpthread.so		libthr.so

# Glue for Linux-only EPSON printer .so to be loaded into cups, etc.
[/usr/local/lib/pips/libsc80c.so]
libc.so.6		pluginwrapper/pips.so
libdl.so.2		pluginwrapper/pips.so
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ldd 1 ,
.Xr rtld 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm libmap
mechanism first appeared in
.Fx 5.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Matthew N. Dodd Aq Mt winter@jurai.net
and extensively rewritten by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq Mt des@FreeBSD.org .
