.\"	$OpenBSD: mk.conf.5,v 1.38 2019/08/08 12:06:50 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Jason McIntyre
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 8 2019 $
.Dt MK.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mk.conf
.Nd system-specific configuration parameters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd .include <bsd.own.mk>
.Sh DESCRIPTION
To get system-specific configuration parameters,
.In bsd.own.mk
will try to include the file specified by the
.Ev MAKECONF
variable.
If
.Ev MAKECONF
is not set, or no such file exists, the system make configuration file
.Pa /etc/mk.conf
is included, if it exists.
By default, this file does not exist,
and must be created from scratch.
For more information on how the make process works,
and details of the format of make files,
see
.Xr make 1 .
.Pp
.In bsd.own.mk
is generally useful when building Makefiles, so that
they use the same default owners, etc. as the rest of the tree.
These files may define any of the variables described below.
Additionally, see
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5
for a list of variables that can be set by the
.Xr ports 7
subsystem.
.Sh VARIABLES
The following variables are set by
.In bsd.own.mk ,
if they are not already defined.
Defaults are in brackets.
.Bl -tag -width INSTALL_STRIP
.It Ev BINGRP
Binary group.
.Bq bin
.It Ev BINMODE
Binary mode.
.Bq 555
.It Ev BINOWN
Binary owner.
.Bq root
.It Ev BSDOBJDIR
The real path to the system "obj" tree, so that "make obj" will work correctly.
.Bq Pa /usr/obj
.It Ev BSDSRCDIR
The real path to the system sources, so that "make obj" will work correctly.
.Bq Pa /usr/src
.It Ev DIRMODE
Mode for new directories.
.Bq 755
.It Ev DOCDIR
Base path for system documentation installation.
.Bq Pa /usr/share/doc
.It Ev DOCGRP
Documentation group.
.Bq bin
.It Ev DOCMODE
Documentation mode.
.Bq Ev ${NONBINMODE}
.It Ev DOCOWN
Documentation owner.
.Bq root
.It Ev INSTALL_COPY
The old usage of this flag is obsolescent, since
.Xr install 1
now copies by default.
However, it can also be used to specify that a file not be copied unless it
is different (via the
.Fl p
option).
See
.Xr install 1
for details.
This is to be used when building an install script so that the entire
system can either be installed with copies, or copy-if-different using a
single knob.
.Bq Fl c
.It Ev INSTALL_STRIP
The flag passed to the install program to cause the binary to be stripped.
This is to be used when building an install script so that the entire
system can be made stripped/not-stripped using a single knob.
Note that
.Ev INSTALL_STRIP
is not set if
.Ev ${DEBUG}
is defined.
.Bq Fl s
.It Ev LIBDIR
Base path for library installation.
.Bq Pa /usr/lib
.It Ev LIBGRP
Library group.
.Bq Ev ${BINGRP}
.It Ev LIBMODE
Library mode.
.Bq Ev ${NONBINMODE}
.It Ev LIBOWN
Library owner.
.Bq Ev ${BINOWN}
.It Ev MANDIR
Base path for manual installation.
.Bq Pa /usr/share/man/man
.It Ev MANGRP
Manual group.
.Bq bin
.It Ev MANMODE
Manual mode.
.Bq Ev ${NONBINMODE}
.It Ev MANOWN
Manual owner.
.Bq root
.It Ev NONBINMODE
Mode for non-executable files.
.Bq 444
.It Ev XOBJDIR
The real path to the "obj" tree for building the X Window System.
.Bq Pa /usr/xobj
.It Ev XSRCDIR
The real path to the X Window System sources.
.Bq Pa /usr/xenocara
.El
.Sh ADDITIONAL VARIABLES
Additionally, the following variables may be set by
.In bsd.own.mk
or in a make configuration file to modify the behaviour of the system build
process (default values are in brackets along with comments, if set by
.In bsd.own.mk ) :
.Bl -tag -width GLOBAL_AUTOCONF_CACHE
.It Ev BUILDUSER
De-escalate privileges to user
.Ev BUILDUSER
when building the base system from source
or making release tarballs.
.Bq build
.It Ev DEBUG
Added to assembly, C compiler and linking passes.
Typically set to
.Fl g
to build with debugging symbols.
Also doesn't set
.Ev INSTALL_STRIP
to
.Fl s
per default if defined.
.It Ev GLOBAL_AUTOCONF_CACHE
Set to the name of a file that all cached GNU autoconf test results will be
saved in.
Reduces redundant tests.
Be careful!
Redundant tests may not be redundant when installing substantially
updated GNU programs.
.It Ev KEEPKERNELS
If set to "yes", the kernel object directories will not be cleaned out
during "make build".
.It Ev NOPIC
Do not build shared libraries.
.It Ev NOPIE
Do not build PIE objects or executables.
.It Ev NOPROFILE
Do not build profiled versions of system libraries.
.It Ev PIPE
If set to
.Qq -pipe ,
.Xr gcc 1
will be given the
.Fl pipe
option which can speed up compiles on machines with memory to spare.
Instead of using temp files,
.Xr gcc 1
uses pipes for the temporary data.
.It Ev SKEY
Compile in support for S/key authentication.
.Bq yes; set unconditionally
.It Ev SKIPDIR
A space separated list of directories,
relative to
.Ev BSDSRCDIR ,
to be skipped during "make build".
.It Ev SUDO
Command run by
.Xr make 1
when doing certain operations requiring root privileges.
.It Ev SYS_INCLUDE
Copy or symlink kernel include files into
.Pa /usr/include .
Possible values are "symlinks" or "copies"
(which is the same as the variable being unset).
.It Ev WARNINGS
Adds appropriate warning flags (defined in
.Ev CDIAGFLAGS ,
e.g.\&
.Fl Wall . . . )
to compiles.
.Bq no
.It Ev WOBJGROUP
Group having write access to
.Ev BSDOBJDIR
and
.Ev XOBJDIR .
.Bq wobj
.It Ev WOBJUMASK
.Xr umask 2
with which the "obj" tree will be created by "make obj".
.Bq 007
.It Ev XENOCARA_BUILD_DRI
Build X with Direct Rendering Infrastructure (DRI) support,
providing some hardware acceleration.
This is on by default for amd64/i386 architectures.
.It Ev XENOCARA_RERUN_AUTOCONF
Forces X builds to re-run automake and autoconf in each module before
configuring them.
This option requires that the automake, autoconf and libtool
packages are installed.
.Bq no
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX -compact
.It Pa /etc/mk.conf
System make configuration file.
.It Pa /usr/share/mk/*
System include make files.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr make 1 ,
.Xr bsd.port.mk 5 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Ox 3.4 .
