.\"	$OpenBSD: mygate.5,v 1.3 2025/03/29 11:24:02 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Jason McIntyre <jmc@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 29 2025 $
.Dt MYGATE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mygate
.Nd default gateway
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm mygate
file is read by
.Xr netstart 8
at system startup time.
.Pp
.Pa /etc/mygate ,
if it exists,
contains the address of the gateway host.
The gateway is added to the routing tables by the
.Xr route 8
utility.
If
.Pa /etc/mygate
does not exist, no default gateway is added to the routing tables.
The file may contain gateway addresses for both IPv4 and IPv6 networks
in dotted quad notation for v4
.Pq e.g. 192.0.2.1
or in colon notation for v6
.Pq e.g. 2001:db8::1 .
Each address must be specified on a separate line.
If more than one address of a specific family is found,
only the first is used \- all other addresses of that family are ignored.
.Pp
.Pa /etc/mygate
is processed after all interfaces have been configured.
If any
.Xr hostname.if 5
files contain
.Dq inet autoconf
directives,
IPv4 entries in
.Pa /etc/mygate
will be ignored.
If they contain
.Dq inet6 autoconf
directives,
IPv6 entries will be ignored.
.Pp
Additionally, arbitrary shell commands can be executed during processing
of this file, using
.Ar \&! Ns Ar command
directives similar to
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
This is useful for doing additional configuration after all interfaces
are configured by
.Xr netstart 8 .
.Pp
Empty lines and lines beginning with
.Sq #
are ignored.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/mygate" -compact
.It Pa /etc/mygate
Default gateway address(es).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr netstart 8 ,
.Xr route 8
.Sh HISTORY
Support for the file
.Pa /etc/mygate
first appeared in
.Nx 0.8 .
