.\"	$OpenBSD: myname.5,v 1.13 2025/03/29 11:24:02 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Jason McIntyre <jmc@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 29 2025 $
.Dt MYNAME 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm myname
.Nd default hostname
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm myname
file is read by
.Xr rc 8
at system startup time.
.Pp
.Pa /etc/myname
contains the symbolic name of the host machine.
The file should contain a single line specifying the
fully qualified domain name
.Pq FQDN
of the system
.Pq e.g. host.example.com .
The name must be resolvable, either by matching a hostname specified in
.Pa /etc/hosts
(see
.Xr hosts 5 )
or through DNS
(see
.Xr resolv.conf 5 ) .
The hostname is set via the
.Xr hostname 1
utility at boot time.
See
.Xr hostname 7
for a description of hostname resolution.
.Pp
Empty lines and lines beginning with
.Sq #
are ignored.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/myname" -compact
.It Pa /etc/myname
Default hostname.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hostname 1 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr hosts 5 ,
.Xr resolv.conf 5 ,
.Xr hostname 7 ,
.Xr rc 8
.Sh HISTORY
Support for the file
.Pa /etc/myname
first appeared in 386BSD 0.1.
