.\" Copyright (c) 2003
.\" Originally written by Sergey A. Osokin
.\" Rewritten by Tom Rhodes
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 2, 2018
.Dt NSMB.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nsmb.conf
.Nd configuration file for
.Tn SMB
requests
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains information about the computers, users, and shares
or mount points for the
.Tn SMB
network protocol.
.Pp
The configuration files are loaded in the following order:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -offset indent -width "" -compact
.It
.Pa ~/.nsmbrc
.It
.Pa /etc/nsmb.conf
.El
.Pp
As a result,
.Pa /etc/nsmb.conf
settings
override those in
.Pa ~/.nsmbrc .
.Pp
The configuration hierarchy is made up of several sections,
each section containing a few or several lines of parameters
and their assigned values.
Each of these sections must begin with a section name enclosed within
square brackets, similar to:
.Pp
.D1 Bq Ar section_name
.Pp
The end of each section is marked by either the start of a new section,
or by the abrupt ending of the file, commonly referred to as the
.Tn EOF .
Each section may contain zero or more parameters such as:
.Pp
.D1 Bq Ar section_name
.D1 Ar key Ns = Ns Ar value
.Pp
where
.Ar key
represents a parameter name, and
.Ar value
would be the parameter's assigned value.
.Pp
The
.Tn SMB
library uses the following information for section names:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Ic A)
.Bq Li default
.It Ic B)
.Bq Ar SERVER
.It Ic C)
.Bq Ar SERVER : Ns Ar USER
.It Ic D)
.Op Ar SERVER : Ns Ar USER : Ns Ar SHARE
.El
.Pp
Possible keywords may include:
.Bl -column ".Va retry_count" ".Sy Section"
.It Sy "Keyword	Section	Comment"
.It Sy "	A B C D"
.It Va addr        Ta "- + - -" Ta "IP address of SMB server"
.It Va charsets    Ta "- + + +" Ta "local:remote charset pair"
.It Va nbns        Ta "+ + - -" Ta "address of NetBIOS name server (WINS)"
.It Va nbscope     Ta "+ + - -" Ta "NetBIOS scope"
.It Va nbtimeout   Ta "+ + - -" Ta "timeout for NetBIOS name servers"
.It Va password    Ta "- - + +" Ta "plain text or simple encrypted password used to access the given share"
.It Va retry_count Ta "+ + - -" Ta "number of retries before connection is marked as broken"
.It Va timeout     Ta "+ + - -" Ta "SMB request timeout"
.It Va workgroup   Ta "+ + + +" Ta "workgroup name"
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/nsmb.conf"
.It Pa /etc/nsmb.conf
The default remote mount-point configuration file.
.It Pa ~/.nsmbrc
The user specific remote mount-point configuration file.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
What follows is a sample configuration file which may,
or may not match your environment:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Configuration file for example.com
[default]
workgroup=SALES
# The 'FSERVER' is an NT server.
[FSERVER]
charsets=koi8-r:cp866
addr=fserv.example.com
# User specific data for FSERVER
[FSERVER:MYUSER]
password=$$16144562c293a0314e6e1
.Ed
.Pp
All lines which begin with the
.Ql #
character are comments and will not be parsed.
The
.Dq Li default
section describes the default workgroup or domain, in this case
.Dq Li SALES .
The next section depicted here as
.Dq Li FSERVER ,
defines a server section and then assigns it a charset which is only
required when Cyrillic characters are not used.
The hostname value,
.Dq Li fserv.example.com ,
is also assigned in this section.
.Dq Li FSERVER:USER ,
defines the user settings and is useful for saving the password used
during a specific connection.
The password may be plaintext or obfuscated using simple encryption.
The simple encrypted password starts with the `$$1' symbols.
Warning: the encryption function is very weak and intended only to hide
clear text passwords.
If the use of simple encryption is desired, the following command may be
used on a password:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
smbutil crypt
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr smbutil 1 ,
.Xr mount_smbfs 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An -nosplit
.An Sergey Osokin Aq Mt osa@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
