.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Brian Somers <brian@Awfulhak.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 7, 2018
.Dt PERIODIC.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm periodic.conf
.Nd periodic job configuration information
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Nm
contains a description of how daily, weekly and monthly system maintenance
jobs should run.
It resides in the
.Pa /etc/defaults
directory and parts may be overridden by a file of the same name in
.Pa /etc ,
which itself may be overridden by the
.Pa /etc/periodic.conf.local
file.
.Pp
The
.Nm
file
is actually sourced as a shell script from each of the periodic scripts
and is intended to simply provide default configuration variables.
.Pp
The following variables are used by
.Xr periodic 8
itself:
.Bl -tag -offset 4n -width 2n
.It Va local_periodic
.Pq Vt str
List of directories to search for periodic scripts.
This list is always prefixed with
.Pa /etc/periodic ,
and is only used when an argument to
.Xr periodic 8
is not an absolute directory name.
.It Ao Ar dir Ac Ns Va _output
.Pq Vt path No or Vt list
What to do with the output of the scripts executed from
the directory
.Ar dir .
If this variable is set to an absolute path name, output is logged to
that file, otherwise it is taken as one or more space separated email
addresses and mailed to those users.
If this variable is not set or is empty, output is sent to standard output.
.Pp
For an unattended machine, suitable values for
.Va daily_output ,
.Va weekly_output ,
and
.Va monthly_output
might be
.Dq Li /var/log/daily.log ,
.Dq Li /var/log/weekly.log ,
and
.Dq Li /var/log/monthly.log
respectively, as
.Xr newsyslog 8
will rotate these files (if they exists) at the appropriate times.
.It Ao Ar dir Ac Ns Va _show_success
.It Ao Ar dir Ac Ns Va _show_info
.It Ao Ar dir Ac Ns Va _show_badconfig
.Pq Vt bool
These variables control whether
.Xr periodic 8
will mask the output of the executed scripts based on their return code
(where
.Ar dir
is the base directory name in which each script resides).
If the return code of a script is
.Sq 0
and
.Ao Ar dir Ac Ns Va _show_success
is set to
.Dq Li NO ,
.Xr periodic 8
will mask the script's output.
If the return code of a script is
.Sq 1
and
.Ao Ar dir Ac Ns Va _show_info
is set to
.Dq Li NO ,
.Xr periodic 8
will mask the script's output.
If the return code of a script is
.Sq 2
and
.Ao Ar dir Ac Ns Va _show_badconfig
is set to
.Dq Li NO ,
.Xr periodic 8
will mask the script's output.
If these variables are set to neither
.Dq Li YES
nor
.Dq Li NO ,
they default to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Dq Li YES
and
.Dq Li NO
respectively.
.Pp
Refer to the
.Xr periodic 8
manual page for how script return codes are interpreted.
.It Va anticongestion_sleeptime
.Pq Vt int
The maximum number of seconds to randomly sleep in order to smooth bursty loads
on a shared resource, such as a download mirror.
.El
.Pp
The following variables are used by the standard scripts that reside in
.Pa /etc/periodic/daily :
.Bl -tag -offset 4n -width 2n
.It Va daily_clean_disks_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to remove all files matching
.Va daily_clean_disks_files
daily.
.It Va daily_clean_disks_files
.Pq Vt str
Set to a list of file names to match.
Wild cards are permitted.
.It Va daily_clean_disks_days
.Pq Vt num
When
.Va daily_clean_disks_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this must also be set to the number of days old that a file's access
and modification times must be before it is deleted.
.It Va daily_clean_disks_verbose
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want the removed files to be reported in your daily output.
.It Va daily_clean_tmps_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to clear temporary directories daily.
.It Va daily_clean_tmps_dirs
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of directories to clear if
.Va daily_clean_tmps_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
.It Va daily_clean_tmps_days
.Pq Vt num
When
.Va daily_clean_tmps_enable
is set, this must also be set to the number of days old that a file's access
and modification times must be before it is deleted.
.It Va daily_clean_tmps_ignore
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of files that should not be deleted when
.Va daily_clean_tmps_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
Wild card characters are permitted.
.It Va daily_clean_tmps_verbose
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want the removed files to be reported in your daily output.
.It Va daily_clean_preserve_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you wish to remove old files from
.Pa /var/preserve .
.It Va daily_clean_preserve_days
.Pq Vt num
Set to the number of days that files must not have been modified before
they are deleted.
.It Va daily_clean_preserve_verbose
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want the removed files to be reported in your daily output.
.It Va daily_clean_msgs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you wish old system messages to be purged.
.It Va daily_clean_msgs_days
.Pq Vt num
Set to the number of days that files must not have been modified before
they are deleted.
If this variable is left blank, the
.Xr msgs 1
default is used.
.It Va daily_clean_rwho_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you wish old files in
.Pa /var/who
to be purged.
.It Va daily_clean_rwho_days
.Pq Vt num
Set to the number of days that files must not have been modified before
they are deleted.
.It Va daily_clean_rwho_verbose
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want the removed files to be reported in your daily output.
.It Va daily_clean_hoststat_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to run
.Nm sendmail Fl bH
to automatically purge stale entries from
.Xr sendmail 8 Ns 's
host status cache.
Files will be deleted using the same criteria as
.Xr sendmail 8
would normally use when determining whether to believe the cached information,
as configured in
.Pa /etc/mail/sendmail.cf .
.It Va daily_backup_passwd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want the
.Pa /etc/master.passwd
and
.Pa /etc/group
files backed up and reported on.
Reporting consists of checking both files for modifications and running
.Xr chkgrp 8
on the
.Pa group
file.
.It Va daily_backup_aliases_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want the
.Pa /etc/mail/aliases
file backed up and modifications to be displayed in your daily output.
.It Va daily_calendar_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm calendar Fl a
daily.
.It Va daily_accounting_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to rotate your daily accounting files.
No rotations are necessary unless
.Va accounting_enable
is enabled in
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Va daily_accounting_compress
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want your daily accounting files to be compressed using
.Xr gzip 1 .
.It Va daily_accounting_save
.Pq Vt num
When
.Va daily_accounting_enable
is set, this may also be set to the number of daily accounting files that are
to be saved.
The default is
.Dq Li 3 .
.It Va daily_accounting_flags
.Pq Vt str
Set to the arguments to pass to the
.Xr sa 8
utility (in addition to
.Fl s )
when
.Va daily_accounting_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
The default is
.Fl q .
.It Va daily_news_expire_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Pa /etc/news.expire .
.It Va daily_status_disks_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Xr df 1
(with the arguments supplied in
.Va daily_status_disks_df_flags )
and
.Nm dump Fl W .
.It Va daily_status_disks_df_flags
.Pq Vt str
Set to the arguments for the
.Xr df 1
utility when
.Va daily_status_disks_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
The default is
.Fl l Fl h .
.It Va daily_status_zfs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm zpool Cm status
on your
.Xr zfs 8
pools.
.It Va daily_status_zfs_zpool_list_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm zpool Cm list
on your
.Xr zfs 8
pools.
Requires
.Va daily_status_zfs_enable
to be set to
.Li YES .
.It Va daily_status_gmirror_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm gmirror Cm status
on your
.Xr gmirror 8
devices.
.It Va daily_status_graid3_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm graid3 Cm status
on your
.Xr graid3 8
devices.
.It Va daily_status_gstripe_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm gstripe Cm status
on your
.Xr gstripe 8
devices.
.It Va daily_status_gconcat_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm gconcat Cm status
on your
.Xr gconcat 8
devices.
.It Va daily_status_mfi_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm mfiutil Cm status
on your
.Xr mfi 4
devices.
.It Va daily_status_network_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Nm netstat Fl i .
.It Va daily_status_network_netstat_flags
.Pq Vt str
Set to additional arguments for the
.Xr netstat 1
utility when
.Va daily_status_network_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
The default is
.Fl d .
.It Va daily_status_network_usedns
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Xr netstat 1
without the
.Fl n
option (to do DNS lookups).
.It Va daily_status_uptime_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Xr uptime 1
(or
.Xr ruptime 1
if
.Va rwhod_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf ) .
.It Va daily_status_mailq_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Xr mailq 1 .
.It Va daily_status_mailq_shorten
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to shorten the
.Xr mailq 1
output when
.Va daily_status_mailq_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
.It Va daily_status_include_submit_mailq
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you also want to run
.Xr mailq 1
on the submit mail queue when
.Va daily_status_mailq_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
This may not work with MTAs other than
.Xr sendmail 8 .
.It Va daily_status_security_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run the security check.
The security check is another set of
.Xr periodic 8
scripts.
The system defaults are in
.Pa /etc/periodic/security .
Local scripts should be placed in
.Pa /usr/local/etc/periodic/security .
See the
.Xr periodic 8
manual page for more information.
.It Va daily_status_security_inline
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want the security check output inline.
The default is to either mail or log the output according to the value of
.Va daily_status_security_output .
.It Va daily_status_security_output
.Pq Vt str
Where to send the output of the security check if
.Va daily_status_security_inline
is set to
.Dq Li NO .
This variable behaves in the same way as the
.Va *_output
variables above, namely it can be set either to one or more email addresses
or to an absolute file name.
.It Va daily_status_mail_rejects_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to summarise mail rejections logged to
.Pa /var/log/maillog
for the previous day.
.It Va daily_status_mail_rejects_logs
.Pq Vt num
Set to the number of maillog files that should be checked
for yesterday's mail rejects.
.It Va daily_status_ntpd
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to enable NTP status check.
.It Va daily_status_world_kernel
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to check the running userland and kernel are in sync.
.It Va daily_queuerun_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to manually run the mail queue at least once a day.
.It Va daily_submit_queuerun
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you also want to manually run the submit mail queue at least once a day
when
.Va daily_queuerun_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
.It Va daily_scrub_zfs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run a zfs scrub periodically.
.It Va daily_scrub_zfs_pools
.Pq Vt str
A space separated list of names of zfs pools to scrub.
If the list is empty or not set, all zfs pools are scrubbed.
.It Va daily_scrub_zfs_default_threshold
.Pq Vt int
Number of days between a scrub if no pool-specific threshold is set.
If not set, the default value is 35, corresponding to 5 weeks.
.It Va daily_scrub_zfs_ Ns Ao Ar poolname Ac Ns Va _threshold
.Pq Vt int
The same as
.Va daily_scrub_zfs_default_threshold
but specific to the pool
.Ao Ar poolname Ac Ns .
.It Va daily_local
.Pq Vt str
Set to a list of extra scripts that should be run after all other
daily scripts.
All scripts must be absolute path names.
.El
.Pp
The following variables are used by the standard scripts that reside in
.Pa /etc/periodic/weekly :
.Bl -tag -offset 4n -width 2n
.It Va weekly_locate_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Pa /usr/libexec/locate.updatedb .
This script is run using
.Nm nice Fl 5
as user
.Dq Li nobody ,
and generates the table used by the
.Xr locate 1
command.
.It Va weekly_whatis_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to run
.Pa /usr/libexec/makewhatis.local .
This script regenerates the database used by the
.Xr apropos 1
command.
.It Va weekly_noid_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to locate orphaned files on the system.
An orphaned file is one with an invalid owner or group.
.It Va weekly_noid_dirs
.Pq Vt str
A list of directories under which orphaned files are searched for.
This would usually be set to
.Pa / .
.It Va weekly_status_security_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Weekly counterpart of
.Va daily_status_security_enable .
.It Va weekly_status_security_inline
.Pq Vt bool
Weekly counterpart of
.Va daily_status_security_inline .
.It Va weekly_status_security_output
.Pq Vt str
Weekly counterpart of
.Va daily_status_security_output .
.It Va weekly_status_pkg_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to use
.Xr pkg-version 8
to list installed packages which are out of date.
.It Va pkg_version
.Pq Vt str
When
.Va weekly_status_pkg_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this variable specifies the program that is used to determine the out of
date packages.
If unset, the
.Xr pkg-version 8
program is used.
As an example, this variable might be set to
.Dq Li portversion
if the
.Pa ports/sysutils/portupgrade
port has been installed.
.It Va pkg_version_index
.Pq Vt str
This variable specifies the
.Pa INDEX
file from
.Pa /usr/ports
that should be used by
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
Because the dependency tree may be substantially different between versions of
.Fx ,
there may be more than one
.Pa INDEX
file in
.Pa /usr/ports .
.Pp
Note, if the
.Va pkg_version
variable is set to
.Dq Li portversion ,
it will also be necessary to arrange that the correct
.Pa INDEX
file is specified
using environment variables and that
.Va pkg_version_index
is cleared in
.Pa /etc/periodic.conf
.Pq Dq Li pkg_version_index= .
.It Va weekly_local
.Pq Vt str
Set to a list of extra scripts that should be run after all other
weekly scripts.
All scripts must be absolute path names.
.El
.Pp
The following variables are used by the standard scripts that reside in
.Pa /etc/periodic/monthly :
.Bl -tag -offset 4n -width 2n
.It Va monthly_accounting_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to do login accounting using the
.Xr ac 8
command.
.It Va monthly_status_security_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Monthly counterpart of
.Va daily_status_security_enable .
.It Va monthly_status_security_inline
.Pq Vt bool
Monthly counterpart of
.Va daily_status_security_inline .
.It Va monthly_status_security_output
.Pq Vt str
Monthly counterpart of
.Va daily_status_security_output .
.It Va monthly_local
.Pq Vt str
Set to a list of extra scripts that should be run after all other
monthly scripts.
All scripts must be absolute path names.
.El
.Pp
The following variables are used by the standard scripts that reside in
.Pa /etc/periodic/security .
Those scripts are usually run from daily
.Pq Va daily_status_security_enable ,
weekly
.Pq Va weekly_status_security_enable ,
and monthly
.Pq Va monthly_status_security_enable
periodic hooks.
The
.Va ..._period
of each script can be configured as
.Dq daily ,
.Dq weekly ,
.Dq monthly
or
.Dq NO .
Note that when periodic security scripts are run from
.Xr crontab 5 ,
they will be always run unless their
.Va ..._enable
or
.Va ..._period
variable is set to
.Dq NO .
.Bl -tag -offset 4n -width 2n
.It Va security_status_diff_flags
.Pq Vt str
Set to the arguments to pass to the
.Xr diff 1
utility when generating differences.
The default is
.Fl b u .
.It Va security_status_chksetuid_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to compare the modes and modification times of setuid executables with
the previous day's values.
.It Va security_status_chksetuid_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_chkportsum_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to verify checksums of all installed packages against the known checksums in
.Pa /var/db/pkg .
.It Va security_status_chkportsum_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_neggrpperm_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to check for files where the group of a file has less permissions than
the world at large.
When users are in more than 14 supplemental groups these negative
permissions may not be enforced via NFS shares.
.It Va security_status_neggrpperm_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_chkmounts_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to check for changes mounted file systems to the previous day's values.
.It Va security_status_chkmounts_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_noamd
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
if you want to ignore
.Xr amd 8
mounts when comparing against yesterday's file system mounts in the
.Va security_status_chkmounts_enable
check.
.It Va security_status_chkuid0_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to check
.Pa /etc/master.passwd
for accounts with UID 0.
.It Va security_status_chkuid0_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_passwdless_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to check
.Pa /etc/master.passwd
for accounts with empty passwords.
.It Va security_status_passwdless_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_logincheck_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to check
.Pa /etc/login.conf
ownership, see
.Xr login.conf 5
for more information.
.It Va security_status_logincheck_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_ipfwdenied_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to show log entries for packets denied by
.Xr ipfw 8
since yesterday's check.
.It Va security_status_ipfwdenied_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_ipfdenied_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to show log entries for packets denied by
.Xr ipf 8
since yesterday's check.
.It Va security_status_ipfdenied_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_pfdenied_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to show log entries for packets denied by
.Xr pf 4
since yesterday's check.
.It Va security_status_pfdenied_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_ipfwlimit_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to display
.Xr ipfw 8
rules that have reached their verbosity limit.
.It Va security_status_ipfwlimit_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_kernelmsg_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to show new
.Xr dmesg 8
entries since yesterday's check.
.It Va security_status_kernelmsg_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_loginfail_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to display failed logins from
.Pa /var/log/messages
in the previous day.
.It Va security_status_loginfail_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va security_status_tcpwrap_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to display connections denied by tcpwrappers (see
.Xr hosts_access 5 )
from
.Pa /var/log/messages
during the previous day.
.It Va security_status_tcpwrap_period
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Dq Li daily ,
.Dq Li weekly ,
.Dq Li monthly
or
.Dq Li NO .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/defaults/periodic.conf"
.It Pa /etc/defaults/periodic.conf
The default configuration file.
This file contains all default variables and values.
.It Pa /etc/periodic.conf
The usual system specific variable override file.
.It Pa /etc/periodic.conf.local
An additional override file, useful when
.Pa /etc/periodic.conf
is shared or distributed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr calendar 1 ,
.Xr df 1 ,
.Xr diff 1 ,
.Xr gzip 1 ,
.Xr locate 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr msgs 1 ,
.Xr netstat 1 ,
.Xr nice 1 ,
.Xr login.conf 5 ,
.Xr rc.conf 5 ,
.Xr ac 8 ,
.Xr chkgrp 8 ,
.Xr dump 8 ,
.Xr newsyslog 8 ,
.Xr periodic 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr sendmail 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file appeared in
.Fx 4.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Brian Somers Aq Mt brian@Awfulhak.org
