.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)phones.5	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 5, 1993
.Dt PHONES 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm phones
.Nd remote host phone number data base
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Pa /etc/phones
contains the system-wide
private phone numbers for the
.Xr tip 1
program.
This file is normally unreadable, and so may contain
privileged information.
The format of the file is a series of lines
of the form: <system-name>[\ \et]*<phone-number>.
The system name is
one of those defined in the
.Xr remote 5
file and the phone number is constructed from any sequence of
characters terminated only by ``,'' or the end of the line.
The ``='' and ``*'' characters are
indicators to the auto call units to pause and wait for a second dial
tone (when going through an exchange).
The ``='' is required by the
.Tn DF02-AC
and the ``*'' is required by the
.Tn BIZCOMP
1030.
.Pp
Only one phone number per line is permitted.
However, if more than
one line in the file contains the same system name
.Xr tip 1
will attempt to dial each one in turn, until it establishes a connection.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/phones -compact
.It Pa /etc/phones
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tip 1 ,
.Xr remote 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
