.\"-
.\" Copyright 2004-2005 Colin Percival
.\" All rights reserved
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted providing that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 30, 2005
.Dt PORTSNAP.CONF 5
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm portsnap.conf
.Nd configuration file for
.Xr portsnap 8
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file controls where
.Xr portsnap 8
fetches ports tree snapshots from,
which RSA key should be trusted to sign the updates, and what
directories should hold the compressed and live ports trees.
.Pp
A line of the form
.Dl SERVERNAME=portsnap.example.com
specifies the source from which snapshots should be fetched.
This is equivalent to the
.Fl s Ar server
option to
.Xr portsnap 8 ,
and will be ignored if the command-line
option is used.
.Pp
A line of the form
.Dl KEYPRINT=0123456789abc ... 456789abcdef
(64 characters in total)
specifies the SHA-256 hash of the OpenSSL public key file
belonging to an RSA keypair which is trusted to sign updates.
This is equivalent to the
.Fl k Ar KEY
option to
.Xr portsnap 8 ,
and will be ignored if the command-line
option is used.
.Pp
A line of the form
.Dl WORKDIR=/path/to/workdir
specifies the directory in which portsnap should maintain its compressed
snapshot of the ports tree.
This is equivalent to the
.Fl d Ar workdir
option to
.Xr portsnap 8 ,
and will be ignored if the command-line option
is used.
.Pp
A line of the form
.Dl PORTSDIR=/path/to/portstree
specifies the directory in which portsnap will create the live ports
tree from its compressed snapshot via the
.Cm extract
and
.Cm update
commands.
This is equivalent to the
.Fl p Ar portsdir
option to
.Xr portsnap 8 ,
and will be ignored if the command-line option
is used.
.Pp
If more than one line of any of the above forms is included in
.Nm
then only the last one will take effect.
.Pp
A line of the form
.Dl INDEX INDEXFILE DESCRIBEFILE
will instruct
.Xr portsnap 8
that the specified INDEX file is generated from the specified
describe file distributed by the portsnap server.
.Pp
Finally, a line of the form
.Dl REFUSE foo bar
will instruct
.Xr portsnap 8
to ignore parts of the ports tree with paths starting with
.Ar foo
or
.Ar bar ,
which are interpreted as extended regular expressions by
.Xr egrep 1 .
This will result in those parts of the tree not being updated
in the compressed snapshot when the
.Cm fetch
and
.Cm cron
commands are used and not being extracted when the
.Cm extract
command is used (unless a specific
.Ar path
is passed to
.Xr portsnap 8 ) ,
and if those parts of the ports tree are present they
will not be updated when the
.Cm update
command is used.
Unlike the other options, the parameters in REFUSE lines
accumulate and all such lines are considered.
.Bf Em
Note that operating with an incomplete ports tree is not
supported and may cause unexpected results.
.Ef
.Pp
Any lines not of the above forms will be ignored.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/portsnap.conf"
.It Pa /etc/portsnap.conf
Default location of the portsnap configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr egrep 1 ,
.Xr fetch 1 ,
.Xr sha256 1 ,
.Xr portsnap 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Colin Percival Aq Mt cperciva@FreeBSD.org
