.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Paul Armstrong
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Thomas Abthorpe
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\" notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\" notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\" documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 14, 2012
.Dt PORTINDEX 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm INDEX
.Nd "File containing information about the state of the ports tree"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The port index file in
.Pa /usr/ports
contains various bits of information about the ports tree.
Each major branch of
.Fx
has a separate index file, named
.Dq INDEX- Ns Ar N ,
where
.Ar N
is the major version number of the
.Fx
branch, i.e.:
.Pa INDEX-7 ,
or
.Pa INDEX-8 .
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXXXXXX
.It Cm \&name
The name of the package.
.It Cm \&path
The path to the port directory.
.It Cm \&install prefix
The default install prefix.
.It Cm \&short description
A short description.
.It Cm \&full description
The path to the full description.
.It Cm \&maintainer email
The email address of the maintainer.
.It Cm \&index
The categories this port is part of.
.It Cm \&build dependencies
Ports required to be installed prior to building this port.
.It Cm \&run dependencies
Ports required to be installed for this port to run.
.It Cm \&website
The project website for the port.
.It Cm \&e-deps
Ports that may be required to extract this port.
.It Cm \&p-deps
Ports that may be required to patch this port.
.It Cm \&f-deps
Ports that may be required to fetch this port.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/ports/INDEX-8XX
.It Pa /usr/ports/INDEX- Ns Ar N
where
.Ar N
is the major version number of the
.Fx
branch.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
vim-6.3.15|/usr/ports/editors/vim|/usr/local|Vi "workalike", with many additional features|/usr/ports/editors/vim/pkg-descr|obrien@FreeBSD.org|editors|libiconv-1.9.2_1|libiconv-1.9.2_1|http://www.vim.org/|||
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr build 7 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Paul Armstrong
and
.An Thomas Abthorpe Aq Mt tabthorpe@FreeBSD.org .
