.\"	$OpenBSD: python-module.5,v 1.19 2025/09/17 22:11:55 sthen Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Marc Espie
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 17 2025 $
.Dt PYTHON-MODULE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm python-module
.Nd lang/python port module
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents the behavior of setting
.Li MODULES=lang/python
in the
.Xr ports 7
tree.
.Pp
By default, the module builds ports using Python 3.
For legacy ports using Python 2,
.Ev MODPY_VERSION
may be set manually to ${MODPY_DEFAULT_VERSION_2}.
.Pp
The module then sets
.Ev MODPY_BIN ,
.Ev MODPY_INCDIR ,
.Ev MODPY_LIBDIR ,
.Ev MODPY_SITEPKG ,
.Ev MODPY_SETUP ,
.Ev MODPY_TEST_DIR ,
.Ev MODPY_TEST_LOCALE ,
.Ev MODPY_WANTLIB ,
.Ev MODPY_LIB_DEPENDS ,
.Ev MODPY_RUN_DEPENDS ,
.Ev MODPY_TEST_DEPENDS ,
.Ev MODPY_BUILD_DEPENDS ,
and
.Ev MODPY_ADJ_FILES
accordingly.
.Pp
The module also adds a dependency on the Python interpreter to
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Ev RUN_DEPENDS
unless
.Ev MODPY_RUNDEP
is set to No,
.It
.Ev BUILD_DEPENDS
unless
.Ev MODPY_BUILDDEP
is set to No or
.Ev NO_BUILD
is set to Yes,
.It
.Ev TEST_DEPENDS
if
.Ev MODPY_PYTEST
is set to Yes
unless
.Ev MODPY_TESTDEP
is set to No.
.El
.Pp
It also appends
.Ev MODPY_TEST_LOCALE
to
.Ev TEST_ENV
and changes to the directory specified in
.Ev MODPY_TEST_DIR
.Po
by default ${WRKSRC}
.Pc
before running tests.
.Pp
Most modern Python software can be packaged using a PEP 517 build
frontend (in the
.Pa devel/py-build
port).
To use this, set
.Ev MODPY_PYBUILD
to the name of the build backend.
If the port provides a
.Pa pyproject.toml
file, check the "build-backend" line in the [build-system] section.
.Nm
currently supports
flit, flit_core, flit_scm, hatchling, hatch-vcs,
jupyter_packaging, maturin, mesonpy,
pbr, pdm, poetry-core, setuptools, setuptools_scm, setuptools-rust,
and uv_build.
In cases where an uncommon backend is used, or where the build backend is
distributed with the software itself,
.Ev MODPY_PYBUILD
can be set to
.Sq other
to use the PEP 517 build mechanism without adding a dependency
for a backend.
If no
.Pa pyproject.toml
is provided then it most likely uses setuptools.
.Nm
performs some checks and warns about some incorrect
.Ev MODPY_PYBUILD
settings after fake-install.
Setting
.Ev MODPY_PYBUILD
adds the backend to
.Ev MODPY_BUILD_DEPENDS ,
and sets
.Ev MODPY_PYTEST .
.Pp
Some checks are done to warn during "make fake" if
.Ev MODPY_PYBUILD
appears to be set incorrectly.
.Pp
Python 2 and some older Python 3 ports using setuptools still set
.Ev MODPY_SETUPTOOLS
to Yes, which appends to
.Ev MODPY_BUILD_DEPENDS
and calls the relevant commands to build (these ports are built
using the deprecated mechanism of calling
.Pa setup.py
directly).
Arguments can be passed to setup.py during
.Cm configure
with
.Ev MODPY_SETUP_ARGS .
Extra arguments to the build and install commands can be passed via
.Ev MODPY_DISTUTILS_BUILDARGS
and
.Ev MODPY_DISTUTILS_INSTALLARGS .
These ports can often be converted to
.Ev MODPY_PYBUILD
with some small changes to the port.
.Ev MODPY_SETUPTOOLS
should not be used for new ports.
.Pp
Ports using pytest should set
.Ev MODPY_PYTEST
to Yes unless
.Ev MODPY_PYBUILD
is used, when it is already set by default.
Arguments can be passed to pytest during
.Cm test
with
.Ev MODPY_PYTEST_ARGS ,
for example to list names of test scripts if the automatic
detection fails,
to disable certain test scripts with
.Sq --ignore ,
or to disable certain individual tests with
.Sq -k .
User setting
.Ev MODPY_PYTEST_USERARGS ,
if present, is passed on the command line.
This allows setting pytest flags to increase verbosity,
show test durations, enable colours, etc.
.Pp
If
.Ev MODPY_TEST_LINK_SO
is set to Yes, symbolic links to all .so files in the build directory
will be created before running tests.
These are created in
.Ev MODPY_TEST_LINK_SRC ,
which defaults to ${WRKSRC}.
This is required when tests load .so files via relative imports.
.Pp
All ports that generate egg-info or dist-info files should set
.Ev MODPY_DISTV
to the version string used by the
.Fn setup
function in the port's
.Pa setup.py
or the version in
.Pa pyproject.toml .
.Pp
If any files have a python shebang line where the interpreter should be
${MODPY_BIN}, list them in
.Ev MODPY_ADJ_FILES .
These filenames can be relative to ${WRKSRC} and will be modified
at the end of
.Cm pre-configure .
.Pp
For ports not using standard Python build infrastructure,
it may be necessary to bytecode-compile installed .py files.
This can be done by using
.Ev ${MODPY_COMPILEALL} ,
usually in a post-install target.
This passes flags to use MAKE_JOBS, strip off WRKINST, and use
standard optimization passes.
File or directory names can be given.
Directories are handled recursively.
.Pp
This module also affects
.Ev CATEGORIES ,
.Ev MAKE_ENV ,
.Ev CONFIGURE_ENV ,
and
.Ev SUBST_VARS ,
and it may affect the
.Cm test
target.
.Pp
If
.Ev MODPY_PI
is set to
.Sq Yes ,
the module will provide a default for
.Ev HOMEPAGE
and set
.Ev SITES
.Po
the subdirectory can be overridden with
.Ev MODPY_PI_DIR
.Pc .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port-modules 5
