.\" Copyright (c) 2001	Nik Clayton
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 30, 2007
.Dt QUOTA.USER 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm quota.user , quota.group
.Nd per file system quota database
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Each file system with active quotas should contain a
.Pa quota.user
and
.Pa quota.group
file in the file system root.
These files are created by
.Xr quotacheck 8 ,
and should be edited with
.Xr edquota 8 .
It is possible to specify a different location and file name with the
.Dq Li userquota
and
.Dq Li groupquota
options in the
.Xr fstab 5
file.
.Pp
The data files contain the following information:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
Current block usage
.It
Current number of files
.It
Soft block limit
.It
Soft file limit
.It
Hard block limit
.It
Hard file limit
.It
Block grace time remaining if over the soft limit
.It
File grace time remaining if over the soft limit
.El
.Pp
See
.Xr edquota 8
for an explanation on the various limits and grace periods.
.Pp
During normal quota operations the
.Xr quotactl 2
interface is used to query or set quota information and the kernel
will maintain the data files as needed.
If quotas are disabled on
a file system, but marked as having quotas enabled in
.Xr fstab 5 ,
then the quota data files will be used directly.
.Pp
The data files are stored as an array of
.Dq Li struct dqblk
structures, as defined in
.In ufs/ufs/quota.h ,
and indexed by UID or GID.
The data files will be written as a sparse file if possible.
Data is only maintained for ids that have either non-zero usage or
non-zero quota limits.
If an attempt is made to access data for an id that would exist past the
end of the current data file, a quota structure with all values set
to zero will be created, and the data file extended as needed.
The
.Xr quotacheck 8
utility will truncate the data files to the minimum size needed
to store the highest id with either non-zero file usage or
non-zero quota limits.
.Pp
The data record for id 0 has special meaning.
If the
.Dq Dv dqb_btime
or
.Dq Dv dbq_itime
fields are non-zero, they are used to indicate the grace period on
that file system for users who have exceeded their soft limit.
These times can be set by
.Xr edquota 8
with the
.Fl t
flag.
If no explicit grace period has been set with
.Xr edquota 8 ,
then the default value of 7 days will be used.
The default values are defined by
.Dv MAX_DQ_TIME
and
.Dv MAX_IQ_TIME
in
.In ufs/ufs/quota.h .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr quota 1 ,
.Xr quotactl 2 ,
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr edquota 8 ,
.Xr quotacheck 8 ,
.Xr quotaoff 8 ,
.Xr quotaon 8 ,
.Xr repquota 8
