.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)remote.5	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 20, 2003
.Dt REMOTE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm remote
.Nd remote host description file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The systems known by
.Xr tip 1
and their attributes are stored in an
.Tn ASCII
file which
is structured somewhat like the
.Xr termcap 5
file.
Each line in the file provides a description for a single
.Em system .
Fields are separated by a colon (``:'').
Lines ending in a \e character with an immediately following newline are
continued on the next line.
.Pp
The first entry is the name(s) of the host system.
If there is more
than one name for a system, the names are separated by vertical bars.
After the name of the system comes the fields of the description.
A field name followed by an `=' sign indicates a string value.
A field name followed by a `#' sign indicates a numeric value.
.Pp
Entries named ``tip*'' and ``cu*'' are used as default entries by
.Xr tip 1 ,
and the
.Xr cu 1
interface to
.Nm tip ,
as follows.
When
.Nm tip
is invoked with only a phone number, it looks for an entry
of the form ``tip300'', where 300 is the data rate with
which the connection is to be made.
When the
.Nm cu
interface is used, entries of the form ``cu300'' are used.
.Sh CAPABILITIES
Capabilities are either strings (str), numbers (num), or boolean
flags (bool).
A string capability is specified by
.Em capability Ns Ar = Ns Em value ;
for example, ``dv=/dev/harris''.
A numeric capability is specified by
.Em capability Ns Ar # Ns Em value ;
for example, ``xa#99''.
A boolean capability is specified by simply listing the capability.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm \&at
(str)
Auto call unit type.
.It Cm \&br
(num)
The data rate (bits per second) used for communications on the
serial port.
When a modem is used, the data rate used to communicate
with the remote modem may be different than this rate.
This is a decimal number.
The default rate is 9600 bits per second.
.It Cm \&cm
(str)
An initial connection message to be sent to the remote host.
For example, if a host is reached through a port selector, this
might be set to the appropriate sequence required to switch to the host.
.It Cm \&cu
(str)
Call unit if making a phone call.
Default is the same as the `dv' field.
.It Cm \&di
(str)
Disconnect message sent to the host when a disconnect is requested by
the user.
.It Cm \&du
(bool)
This host is on a dial-up line.
.It Cm \&dv
(str)
.Ux
device(s) to open to establish a connection.
If this file refers to a terminal line,
.Xr tip 1
attempts to perform an exclusive open on the device to ensure only
one user at a time has access to the port.
.It Cm \&el
(str)
Characters marking an end-of-line.
The default is
.Dv NULL .
`~' escapes are only
recognized by
.Nm tip
after one of the characters in `el', or after a carriage-return.
.It Cm \&fs
(str)
Frame size for transfers.
The default frame size is equal to
.Dv BUFSIZ .
.It Cm \&hd
(bool)
The host uses half-duplex communication, local echo should be performed.
.It Cm \&ie
(str)
Input end-of-file marks.
The default is
.Dv NULL .
.It Cm \&oe
(str)
Output end-of-file string.
The default is
.Dv NULL .
When
.Nm tip
is transferring a file, this
string is sent at end-of-file.
.It Cm \&pa
(str)
The type of parity to use when sending data
to the host.
This may be one of ``even'',
``odd'', ``none'', ``zero'' (always set bit 8 to zero),
``one'' (always set bit 8 to 1).
The default is even parity.
.It Cm \&pn
(str)
Telephone number(s) for this host.
If the telephone number field contains an @ sign,
.Nm tip
searches the file
.Pa /etc/phones
file for a list of telephone numbers (see
.Xr phones 5 ) .
.It Cm \&tc
(str)
Indicates that the list of capabilities is continued in the named
description.
This is used primarily to share common capability information.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/remote -compact
.It Pa /etc/remote
The
.Nm
host description file resides in
.Pa /etc .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Here is a short example showing the use of the capability continuation
feature.
It defines a 56k modem connection on the first serial port at 115200
bits per second, no parity using the Hayes command set with standard
line editing and end of file characters.
The arpavax entry includes everything in the UNIX-57600 entry plus
the phone number for arpavax (in this case an @ character so that it
is retrieved from the environment).
.Bd -literal
UNIX-57600:\e
:dv=/dev/cuau0:el=^D^U^C^S^Q^O@:oe=^D:du:at=hayes:br#115200:pa=none:
arpavax|ax:\e
:pn=\e@:tc=UNIX-57600
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cu 1 ,
.Xr tip 1 ,
.Xr phones 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file format appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Xr tip 1
utility uses its own notion of the serial ports data rate rather than the
system default for a serial port.
