.\"	$OpenBSD: rpc.5,v 1.9 2010/09/01 14:43:34 millert Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: rpc.5,v 1.2 1994/11/30 19:31:30 jtc Exp $
.\"	@(#)rpc.5	2.2 88/08/03 4.0 RPCSRC; from 1.4 87/11/27 SMI;
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010, Oracle America, Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\"     * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"     * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
.\"       copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"       disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials
.\"       provided with the distribution.
.\"     * Neither the name of the "Oracle America, Inc." nor the names of its
.\"       contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"       from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\"   "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\"   LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\"   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\"   COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\"   INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"   DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
.\"   GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\"   INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\"   WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
.\"   NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"   OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 1 2010 $
.Dt RPC 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rpc
.Nd rpc program number database
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains user readable names that
can be used in place of rpc program numbers.
Each line has the following information:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
name of server for the rpc program
.It
rpc program number
.It
aliases
.El
.Pp
Items are separated by any number of blanks and/or tab characters.
.Pp
A hash mark
.Pq Ql #
indicates the beginning of a comment; subsequent characters up to the end of
the line are not interpreted by the routines which search the file.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/rpc -compact
.It Pa /etc/rpc
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Here is an example of the
.Pa /etc/rpc
file from the Sun RPC Source distribution.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#
# rpc 88/08/01 4.0 RPCSRC; from 1.12   88/02/07 SMI
#
portmapper	100000	portmap sunrpc
rstatd		100001	rstat rstat_svc rup perfmeter
rusersd		100002	rusers
nfs		100003	nfsprog
ypserv		100004	ypprog
mountd		100005	mount showmount
ypbind		100007
walld		100008	rwall shutdown
yppasswdd	100009	yppasswd
etherstatd	100010	etherstat
rquotad		100011	rquotaprog quota rquota
sprayd		100012	spray
3270_mapper	100013
rje_mapper	100014
selection_svc	100015	selnsvc
database_svc	100016
rexd		100017	rex
alis		100018
sched		100019
llockmgr	100020
nlockmgr	100021
x25.inr		100022
statmon		100023
status		100024
bootparam	100026
ypupdated	100028	ypupdate
keyserv		100029	keyserver
tfsd		100037
nsed		100038
nsemntd		100039
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getrpcent 3
