.\"	$OpenBSD: services.5,v 1.14 2021/05/05 11:49:17 sthen Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: services.5,v 1.3 1994/11/30 19:31:31 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)services.5	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 5 2021 $
.Dt SERVICES 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm services
.Nd service name database
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains information regarding the known services available in the
Internet.
For each service, a single line should be present with the
following information:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
official service name
port number
protocol name
aliases
.Ed
.Pp
Items are separated by any number of blanks and/or tab characters.
The port number and protocol name are considered a single item; a slash
.Pq Ql /
is used to separate the port and protocol (e.g.,
.Dq 512/tcp ) .
.Pp
A hash mark
.Pq Ql #
indicates the beginning of a comment; subsequent characters up to the
end of the line are not interpreted by the routines which search the file.
.Pp
Service names may contain any printable character other than a
field delimiter, newline, or comment character.
.Pp
To protect service ports from being used for dynamic port assignment,
.Xr rc 8
reads
.Nm
at boot and uses the contents to populate
.Va net.inet.tcp.baddynamic
and
.Va net.inet.udp.baddynamic .
.Pp
While it is the policy of IANA to assign a single well-known port number
for both TCP and UDP, to avoid reducing the dynamic port range unnecessarily,
the unused entries are not always listed in
.Nm .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/services -compact
.It Pa /etc/services
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getservent 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file format appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
.Sh BUGS
A name server should be used instead of a static file.
Lines in
.Pa /etc/services
are limited to
.Dv BUFSIZ
characters (currently 1024).
Longer lines will be ignored.
