.\"	$OpenBSD: spamd.conf.5,v 1.23 2019/09/02 21:18:41 deraadt Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Jason L. Wright (jason@thought.net)
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bob Beck
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 2 2019 $
.Dt SPAMD.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm spamd.conf
.Nd spamd-setup configuration file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file is read by
.Xr spamd-setup 8
to configure
.Em blacklists
for
.Xr spamd 8 .
Blacklists are lists of addresses of likely spammers.
Mail from these addresses never reaches the actual mail server,
but is instead redirected to
.Xr spamd 8
and tarpitted.
.Pp
.Nm
follows the syntax of configuration databases as documented in
.Xr cgetent 3 .
Here is an example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
all:\e
	:nixspam:override:myblack:

nixspam:\e
	:black:\e
	:msg="Your address %A is in the nixspam list\en\e
	See http://www.heise.de/ix/nixspam/dnsbl_en/ for details":\e
	:method=https:\e
	:file=www.openbsd.org/spamd/nixspam.gz

override:\e
	:white:\e
	:method=file:\e
	:file=/etc/mail/override.txt:

myblack:\e
	:black:\e
	:msg=/etc/mail/myblackmsg.txt:\e
	:method=file:\e
	:file=/etc/mail/myblack.txt:
.Ed
.Pp
The default configuration file must include the entry
.Ar all ,
which specifies the order in which lists
are to be applied.
Lists are constructed by name:
blacklists are identified by the capability
.Pf : Ar black : .
If a list is instead given the
.Pf : Ar white :
capability,
addresses in it will not be blacklisted.
The addresses in such a list are removed from the preceding blacklist.
.Pp
In the above example,
if an address was present in all three lists,
blacklists
.Ar nixspam
and
.Ar myblack ,
as well as the exceptions list
.Ar override ,
the address would be removed from list
.Ar nixspam
by the subsequent
.Ar override
list.
However, the address would not be removed from the
.Ar myblack
list.
To remove all the addresses in
.Ar override
from
.Ar myblack ,
the following configuration
would be used instead:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
all:\e
	:nixspam:override:myblack:override:
.Ed
.Pp
The source of the addresses for lists is
specified using the
.Ar method
and
.Ar file
capability entries.
.Pp
.Ar method
specifies the method by which to retrieve a file containing a list of
addresses and may be one of
.Ar http ,
.Ar https ,
.Ar ftp ,
.Ar file ,
or
.Ar exec .
The
.Ar http ,
.Ar https ,
.Ar ftp ,
and
.Ar file
methods will make
.Nm
retrieve the file from the location specified by the
.Ar file
capability.
The
.Ar exec
method will make
.Nm
spawn the program with arguments indicated in the
.Ar file
capability for the list, and reads a list of addresses
from the output of the program.
.Pp
The format of the list of addresses is expected to consist of one
network block or address per line (optionally followed by a space and
text that is ignored).
Comment lines beginning with
.Ar #
are ignored.
Network blocks may be specified in any of the formats as in
the following example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# CIDR format
192.168.20.0/24
# A start - end range
192.168.21.0 - 192.168.21.255
# As a single IP address
192.168.23.1
.Ed
.Pp
Each blacklist must include a message, specified in the
.Ar msg
capability as a string.
If the
.Ar msg
string is enclosed in double quotes, the characters in the quoted string
are escaped as specified in
.Xr cgetent 3
with the exception that a colon (:) is allowed in the quoted string.
The resulting string is used as the message.
Alternatively, if the
.Ar msg
string is not specified in quotes, it is assumed to be a local filename
from which the message text may be read.
.Pp
The message is configured in
.Xr spamd 8
to be displayed in the SMTP dialogue to any connections that match
addresses in the blacklist.
The sequence \e" in the message will produce a double quote in the output.
The sequence %% will produce a single % in the output,
and the sequence \&%A will be expanded in the message by
.Xr spamd 8
to display the connecting IP address in the output.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/mail/spamd.conf"
.It Pa /etc/mail/spamd.conf
Configuration file for
.Xr spamd-setup 8 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr spamd 8 ,
.Xr spamd-setup 8
