.\" $OpenBSD: wsconsctl.conf.5,v 1.7 2020/02/10 13:18:20 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Brian J. Kifiak <bk@rt.fm>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Based on sysctl.conf.5 found in OpenBSD 2.3+:
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Todd C. Miller <millert@openbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
.\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
.\" EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
.\" PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
.\" OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
.\" OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
.\" ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 10 2020 $
.Dt WSCONSCTL.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wsconsctl.conf
.Nd wsconsctl variables to set at system startup
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
contains a list of
.Xr wsconsctl 8
variable assignments that is read at system startup by
.Xr rc 8
during the boot sequence.
.Pp
The file is made up of
.Xr wsconsctl 8
variable assignments
.Pq Ar variable Ns = Ns Ar value
with comments designated by a hash mark
.Pq Sq # .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/examples/wsconsctl.conf -compact
.It Pa /etc/wsconsctl.conf
.It Pa /etc/examples/wsconsctl.conf
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To load a Russian keyboard encoding, one would use the following line:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
keyboard.encoding=ru
.Ed
.Pp
To set the screen burner timeout to 60 seconds, the following can be used:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
display.screen_off=60000
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr wsconsctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
file first appeared in
.Ox 3.0 .
