.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Kernel driver adp1050
=====================

Supported chips:

  * Analog Devices ADP1050

    Prefix: 'adp1050'

    Addresses scanned: I2C 0x70 - 0x77

    Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ADP1050.pdf

Authors:

  - Radu Sabau <radu.sabau@analog.com>


Description
-----------

This driver supprts hardware monitoring for Analog Devices ADP1050 Digital
Controller for Isolated Power Supply with PMBus interface.

The ADP1050 is an advanced digital controller with a PMBus™
interface targeting high density, high efficiency dc-to-dc power
conversion used to monitor system temperatures, voltages and currents.
Through the PMBus interface, the device can monitor input/output voltages,
input current and temperature.

Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate
the devices explicitly.
Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst for details.

Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data.

Sysfs Attributes
----------------

================= ========================================
in1_label         "vin"
in1_input         Measured input voltage
in1_alarm	  Input voltage alarm
in2_label	  "vout1"
in2_input	  Measured output voltage
in2_crit	  Critical maximum output voltage
in2_crit_alarm    Output voltage high alarm
in2_lcrit	  Critical minimum output voltage
in2_lcrit_alarm	  Output voltage critical low alarm
curr1_label	  "iin"
curr1_input	  Measured input current.
curr1_alarm	  Input current alarm
temp1_input       Measured temperature
temp1_crit	  Critical high temperature
temp1_crit_alarm  Chip temperature critical high alarm
================= ========================================
