.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

Kernel driver isl28022
======================

Supported chips:

  * Renesas ISL28022

    Prefix: 'isl28022'

    Addresses scanned: none

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the Renesas website

	       https://www.renesas.com/us/en/www/doc/datasheet/isl28022.pdf

Author:
    Carsten Spieß <mail@carsten-spiess.de>

Description
-----------

The ISL28022 is a power monitor with I2C interface. The device monitors
voltage, current via shunt resistor and calculated power.

Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
device explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst for
details.

The shunt value in micro-ohms, shunt voltage range and averaging can be set
with device properties.
Please refer to the Documentation/devicetree/bindings/hwmon/isl,isl28022.yaml
for bindings if the device tree is used.

The driver supports only shunt and bus continuous ADC mode at 15bit resolution.
Averaging can be set from 1 to 128 samples (power of 2) on both channels.
Shunt voltage range of 40, 80, 160 or 320mV is allowed
The bus voltage range is 60V fixed.

Sysfs entries
-------------

The following attributes are supported. All attributes are read-only.

======================= =======================================================
in0_input		bus voltage (milli Volt)

curr1_input		current (milli Ampere)
power1_input		power (micro Watt)
======================= =======================================================

Debugfs entries
---------------

The following attributes are supported. All attributes are read-only.

======================= =======================================================
shunt_voltage		shunt voltage (micro Volt)
======================= =======================================================
