Kernel driver lm25066
=====================

Supported chips:

  * TI LM25056

    Prefix: 'lm25056'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheets:

	http://www.ti.com/lit/gpn/lm25056

	http://www.ti.com/lit/gpn/lm25056a

  * National Semiconductor LM25066

    Prefix: 'lm25066'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheets:

	http://www.national.com/pf/LM/LM25066.html

	http://www.national.com/pf/LM/LM25066A.html

  * National Semiconductor LM5064

    Prefix: 'lm5064'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://www.national.com/pf/LM/LM5064.html

  * National Semiconductor LM5066

    Prefix: 'lm5066'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

	http://www.national.com/pf/LM/LM5066.html

  * Texas Instruments LM5066I

    Prefix: 'lm5066i'

    Addresses scanned: -

	Datasheet:

    http://www.ti.com/product/LM5066I


Author: Guenter Roeck <linux@roeck-us.net>


Description
-----------

This driver supports hardware monitoring for National Semiconductor / TI LM25056,
LM25066, LM5064, and LM5066/LM5066I Power Management, Monitoring,
Control, and Protection ICs.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver. Please see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.


Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst for
details.


Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data.


Sysfs entries
-------------

The following attributes are supported. Limits are read-write; all other
attributes are read-only.

======================= =======================================================
in1_label		"vin"
in1_input		Measured input voltage.
in1_average		Average measured input voltage.
in1_min			Minimum input voltage.
in1_max			Maximum input voltage.
in1_min_alarm		Input voltage low alarm.
in1_max_alarm		Input voltage high alarm.

in2_label		"vmon"
in2_input		Measured voltage on VAUX pin
in2_min			Minimum VAUX voltage (LM25056 only).
in2_max			Maximum VAUX voltage (LM25056 only).
in2_min_alarm		VAUX voltage low alarm (LM25056 only).
in2_max_alarm		VAUX voltage high alarm (LM25056 only).

in3_label		"vout1"
			Not supported on LM25056.
in3_input		Measured output voltage.
in3_average		Average measured output voltage.
in3_min			Minimum output voltage.
in3_min_alarm		Output voltage low alarm.

curr1_label		"iin"
curr1_input		Measured input current.
curr1_average		Average measured input current.
curr1_max		Maximum input current.
curr1_max_alarm		Input current high alarm.

power1_label		"pin"
power1_input		Measured input power.
power1_average		Average measured input power.
power1_max		Maximum input power limit.
power1_alarm		Input power alarm
power1_input_highest	Historical maximum power.
power1_reset_history	Write any value to reset maximum power history.

temp1_input		Measured temperature.
temp1_max		Maximum temperature.
temp1_crit		Critical high temperature.
temp1_max_alarm		Chip temperature high alarm.
temp1_crit_alarm	Chip temperature critical high alarm.
======================= =======================================================
