Kernel driver lm70
==================

Supported chips:

  * National Semiconductor LM70

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/product/LM70

  * Texas Instruments TMP121/TMP123

    Information: http://focus.ti.com/docs/prod/folders/print/tmp121.html

  * Texas Instruments TMP122/TMP124

    Information: https://www.ti.com/product/tmp122

  * Texas Instruments TMP125

    Information: https://www.ti.com/product/tmp125

  * National Semiconductor LM71

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/product/LM71

  * National Semiconductor LM74

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/product/LM74


Author:
	Kaiwan N Billimoria <kaiwan@designergraphix.com>

Description
-----------

This driver implements support for the National Semiconductor LM70
temperature sensor.

The LM70 temperature sensor chip supports a single temperature sensor.
It communicates with a host processor (or microcontroller) via an
SPI/Microwire Bus interface.

Communication with the LM70 is simple: when the temperature is to be sensed,
the driver accesses the LM70 using SPI communication: 16 SCLK cycles
comprise the MOSI/MISO loop. At the end of the transfer, the 11-bit 2's
complement digital temperature (sent via the SIO line), is available in the
driver for interpretation. This driver makes use of the kernel's in-core
SPI support.

As a real (in-tree) example of this "SPI protocol driver" interfacing
with a "SPI master controller driver", see drivers/spi/spi_lm70llp.c
and its associated documentation.

The LM74 and TMP121/TMP122/TMP123/TMP124 are very similar; main difference is
13-bit temperature data (0.0625 degrees celsius resolution).

The TMP122/TMP124 also feature configurable temperature thresholds.

The TMP125 is less accurate and provides 10-bit temperature data
with 0.25 degrees Celsius resolution.

The LM71 is also very similar; main difference is 14-bit temperature
data (0.03125 degrees celsius resolution).

Thanks to
---------
Jean Delvare <jdelvare@suse.de> for mentoring the hwmon-side driver
development.
