.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Kernel driver lt3074
====================

Supported chips:

  * Analog Devices LT3074

    Prefix: 'lt3074'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/en/products/lt3074.html

Authors: Cedric Encarnacion <cedricjustine.encarnacion@analog.com>


Description
-----------

This driver supports hardware monitoring for Analog Devices LT3074 Linear
Regulator with PMBus interface.

The LT3074 is a low voltage, ultra-low noise and ultra-fast transient
response linear regulator with PMBus serial interface. PMBus telemetry
feature provides information regarding the output voltage and current,
input voltage, bias voltage and die temperature.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver. Please see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.

Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate
the devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst
for details.

Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data.

Sysfs entries
-------------

======================= =======================================================
in1_label		"vin"
in1_input		Measured input voltage
in1_max			Input overvoltage warning limit
in1_max_alarm		Input overvoltage warning status
in1_min			Input undervoltage warning limit
in1_min_alarm		Input undervoltage warning status
in2_label		"vmon"
in2_input		Measured bias voltage
in2_max			Bias overvoltage warning limit
in2_min			Bias undervoltage warning limit
in3_label		"vout1"
in3_input		Measured output voltage
in3_max			Output overvoltage warning limit
in3_max_alarm		Output overvoltage warning status
in3_min			Output undervoltage warning limit
in3_min_alarm		Output undervoltage warning status
curr1_label		"iout1"
curr1_input		Measured output current.
curr1_crit		Output overcurrent fault limit
curr1_crit_alarm	Output overcurrent fault status
temp1_input		Measured temperature
temp1_max		Maximum temperature limit
temp1_max_alarm		Overtemperature warning status
======================= =======================================================
