Kernel driver max16064
======================

Supported chips:

  * Maxim MAX16064

    Prefix: 'max16064'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: http://datasheets.maxim-ic.com/en/ds/MAX16064.pdf

Author: Guenter Roeck <linux@roeck-us.net>


Description
-----------

This driver supports hardware monitoring for Maxim MAX16064 Quad Power-Supply
Controller with Active-Voltage Output Control and PMBus Interface.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver.
Please see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.


Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices for
details.


Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data.


Sysfs entries
-------------

The following attributes are supported. Limits are read-write; all other
attributes are read-only.

======================= ========================================================
in[1-4]_label		"vout[1-4]"
in[1-4]_input		Measured voltage. From READ_VOUT register.
in[1-4]_min		Minimum Voltage. From VOUT_UV_WARN_LIMIT register.
in[1-4]_max		Maximum voltage. From VOUT_OV_WARN_LIMIT register.
in[1-4]_lcrit		Critical minimum Voltage. VOUT_UV_FAULT_LIMIT register.
in[1-4]_crit		Critical maximum voltage. From VOUT_OV_FAULT_LIMIT
			register.
in[1-4]_min_alarm	Voltage low alarm. From VOLTAGE_UV_WARNING status.
in[1-4]_max_alarm	Voltage high alarm. From VOLTAGE_OV_WARNING status.
in[1-4]_lcrit_alarm	Voltage critical low alarm. From VOLTAGE_UV_FAULT
			status.
in[1-4]_crit_alarm	Voltage critical high alarm. From VOLTAGE_OV_FAULT
			status.
in[1-4]_highest		Historical maximum voltage.
in[1-4]_reset_history	Write any value to reset history.

temp1_input		Measured temperature. From READ_TEMPERATURE_1 register.
temp1_max		Maximum temperature. From OT_WARN_LIMIT register.
temp1_crit		Critical high temperature. From OT_FAULT_LIMIT register.
temp1_max_alarm		Chip temperature high alarm. Set by comparing
			READ_TEMPERATURE_1 with OT_WARN_LIMIT if TEMP_OT_WARNING
			status is set.
temp1_crit_alarm	Chip temperature critical high alarm. Set by comparing
			READ_TEMPERATURE_1 with OT_FAULT_LIMIT if TEMP_OT_FAULT
			status is set.
temp1_highest		Historical maximum temperature.
temp1_reset_history	Write any value to reset history.
======================= ========================================================
