.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Kernel driver max17616
======================

Supported chips:

  * Analog Devices MAX17616/MAX17616A

    Prefix: 'max17616'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/max17616-max17616a.pdf

Author:

  - Kim Seer Paller <kimseer.paller@analog.com>


Description
-----------

This driver supports hardware monitoring for Analog Devices MAX17616/MAX17616A
Current-Limiter with OV/Surge, UV, Reverse Polarity, Loss of Ground Protection
with PMBus Interface.

The MAX17616/MAX17616A is a 3V to 80V, 7A current-limiter with overvoltage,
surge, undervoltage, reverse polarity, and loss of ground protection. Through
the PMBus interface, the device can monitor input/output voltages, output current
and temperature.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver. Please see
Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.

Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate
the devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst
for details.

Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data.

Sysfs entries
-------------

================= ========================================
in1_label         "vin"
in1_input         Measured input voltage
in1_alarm	  Input voltage alarm
in2_label	  "vout1"
in2_input	  Measured output voltage
curr1_label	  "iout1"
curr1_input	  Measured output current.
curr1_alarm	  Output current alarm
temp1_input       Measured temperature
temp1_alarm       Chip temperature alarm
================= ========================================
