.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

Kernel driver max20730
======================

Supported chips:

  * Maxim MAX20730

    Prefix: 'max20730'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX20730.pdf

  * Maxim MAX20734

    Prefix: 'max20734'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX20734.pdf

  * Maxim MAX20743

    Prefix: 'max20743'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX20743.pdf

Author: Guenter Roeck <linux@roeck-us.net>


Description
-----------

This driver implements support for Maxim MAX20730, MAX20734, and MAX20743
Integrated, Step-Down Switching Regulators with PMBus support.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver.
Please see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.


Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices.rst for
details.


Sysfs entries
-------------

=================== ===== =======================================================
curr1_crit          RW/RO Critical output current. Please see datasheet for
                          supported limits. Read-only if the chip is
                          write protected; read-write otherwise.
curr1_crit_alarm    RO    Output current critical alarm
curr1_input         RO    Output current
curr1_label         RO    'iout1'
in1_alarm           RO    Input voltage alarm
in1_input           RO    Input voltage
in1_label           RO    'vin'
in2_alarm           RO    Output voltage alarm
in2_input           RO    Output voltage
in2_label           RO    'vout1'
temp1_crit          RW/RO Critical temeperature. Supported values are 130 or 150
                          degrees C. Read-only if the chip is write protected;
                          read-write otherwise.
temp1_crit_alarm    RO    Temperature critical alarm
temp1_input         RO    Chip temperature
=================== ===== =======================================================
