Kernel driver max20751
======================

Supported chips:

  * maxim MAX20751

    Prefix: 'max20751'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet: http://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX20751.pdf

    Application note: http://pdfserv.maximintegrated.com/en/an/AN5941.pdf

Author: Guenter Roeck <linux@roeck-us.net>


Description
-----------

This driver supports MAX20751 Multiphase Master with PMBus Interface
and Internal Buck Converter.

The driver is a client driver to the core PMBus driver.
Please see Documentation/hwmon/pmbus.rst for details on PMBus client drivers.


Usage Notes
-----------

This driver does not auto-detect devices. You will have to instantiate the
devices explicitly. Please see Documentation/i2c/instantiating-devices for
details.


Platform data support
---------------------

The driver supports standard PMBus driver platform data.


Sysfs entries
-------------

The following attributes are supported.

======================= =======================================================
in1_label		"vin1"
in1_input		Measured voltage.
in1_min			Minimum input voltage.
in1_max			Maximum input voltage.
in1_lcrit		Critical minimum input voltage.
in1_crit		Critical maximum input voltage.
in1_min_alarm		Input voltage low alarm.
in1_lcrit_alarm		Input voltage critical low alarm.
in1_min_alarm		Input voltage low alarm.
in1_max_alarm		Input voltage high alarm.

in2_label		"vout1"
in2_input		Measured voltage.
in2_min			Minimum output voltage.
in2_max			Maximum output voltage.
in2_lcrit		Critical minimum output voltage.
in2_crit		Critical maximum output voltage.
in2_min_alarm		Output voltage low alarm.
in2_lcrit_alarm		Output voltage critical low alarm.
in2_min_alarm		Output voltage low alarm.
in2_max_alarm		Output voltage high alarm.

curr1_input		Measured output current.
curr1_label		"iout1"
curr1_max		Maximum output current.
curr1_alarm		Current high alarm.

temp1_input		Measured temperature.
temp1_max		Maximum temperature.
temp1_crit		Critical high temperature.
temp1_max_alarm		Chip temperature high alarm.
temp1_crit_alarm	Chip temperature critical high alarm.

power1_input		Output power.
power1_label		"pout1"
======================= =======================================================
