.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

Kernel driver mp2856
====================

Supported chips:

  * MPS MP2856

    Prefix: 'mp2856'

  * MPS MP2857

    Prefix: 'mp2857'

Author:

	Peter Yin <peter.yin@quantatw.com>

Description
-----------

This driver implements support for Monolithic Power Systems, Inc. (MPS)
vendor dual-loop, digital, multi-phase controller MP2856/MP2857

This device:

- Supports up to two power rail.
- Supports two pages 0 and 1 for and also pages 2 for configuration.
- Can configured VOUT readout in direct or VID format and allows
  setting of different formats on rails 1 and 2. For VID the following
  protocols are available: AMD SVI3 mode with 5-mV/LSB.

Device supports:

- SVID interface.
- AVSBus interface.

Device compliant with:

- PMBus rev 1.3 interface.

Device supports direct format for reading output current, output voltage,
input and output power and temperature.
Device supports linear format for reading input voltage and input power.
Device supports VID and direct formats for reading output voltage.
The below VID modes are supported: AMD SVI3.

The driver provides the following sysfs attributes for current measurements:

- indexes 1  for "iin";
- indexes 2, 3 for "iout";

**curr[1-3]_alarm**

**curr[1-3]_input**

**curr[1-3]_label**

The driver provides the following sysfs attributes for voltage measurements.

- indexes 1 for "vin";
- indexes 2, 3 for "vout";

**in[1-3]_crit**

**in[1-3]_crit_alarm**

**in[1-3]_input**

**in[1-3]_label**

**in[1-3]_lcrit**

**in[1-3]_lcrit_alarm**

The driver provides the following sysfs attributes for power measurements.

- indexes 1 for "pin";
- indexes 2, 3 for "pout";

**power[1-3]_alarm**

**power[1-3]_input**

**power[1-3]_label**

The driver provides the following sysfs attributes for temperature measurements.

**temp[1-2]_crit**

**temp[1-2]_crit_alarm**

**temp[1-2]_input**

**temp[1-2]_max**

**temp[1-2]_max_alarm**
