Documentation/networking/devlink/mlx5.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

====================
mlx5 devlink support
====================

This document describes the devlink features implemented by the ``mlx5``
device driver.

Parameters
==========

.. list-table:: Generic parameters implemented

   * - Name
     - Mode
     - Validation
   * - ``enable_roce``
     - driverinit
     - Type: Boolean
   * - ``io_eq_size``
     - driverinit
     - The range is between 64 and 4096.
   * - ``event_eq_size``
     - driverinit
     - The range is between 64 and 4096.
   * - ``max_macs``
     - driverinit
     - The range is between 1 and 2^31. Only power of 2 values are supported.

The ``mlx5`` driver also implements the following driver-specific
parameters.

.. list-table:: Driver-specific parameters implemented
   :widths: 5 5 5 85

   * - Name
     - Type
     - Mode
     - Description
   * - ``flow_steering_mode``
     - string
     - runtime
     - Controls the flow steering mode of the driver

       * ``dmfs`` Device managed flow steering. In DMFS mode, the HW
         steering entities are created and managed through firmware.
       * ``smfs`` Software managed flow steering. In SMFS mode, the HW
         steering entities are created and manage through the driver without
         firmware intervention.
   * - ``fdb_large_groups``
     - u32
     - driverinit
     - Control the number of large groups (size > 1) in the FDB table.

       * The default value is 15, and the range is between 1 and 1024.

The ``mlx5`` driver supports reloading via ``DEVLINK_CMD_RELOAD``

Info versions
=============

The ``mlx5`` driver reports the following versions

.. list-table:: devlink info versions implemented
   :widths: 5 5 90

   * - Name
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``fw.psid``
     - fixed
     - Used to represent the board id of the device.
   * - ``fw.version``
     - stored, running
     - Three digit major.minor.subminor firmware version number.

Commit message:

net/mlx5: Lag, Control MultiPort E-Switch single FDB mode
MultiPort E-Switch builds on newer hardware's capabilities and introduces
a mode where a single E-Switch is used and all the vports and physical
ports on the NIC are connected to it.

The new mode will allow in the future a decrease in the memory used by the
driver and advanced features that aren't possible today.

This represents a big change in the current E-Switch implantation in mlx5.
Currently, by default, each E-Switch manager manages its E-Switch.
Steering rules in each E-Switch can only forward traffic to the native
physical port associated with that E-Switch. While there are ways to target
non-native physical ports, for example using a bond or via special TC
rules. None of the ways allows a user to configure the driver
to operate by default in such a mode nor can the driver decide
to move to this mode by default as it's user configuration-driven right now.

While MultiPort E-Switch single FDB mode is the preferred mode, older
generations of ConnectX hardware couldn't support this mode so it was never
implemented. Now that there is capable hardware present, start the
transition to having this mode by default.

Introduce a devlink parameter to control MultiPort E-Switch single FDB mode.
This will allow users to select this mode on their system right now
and in the future will allow the driver to move to this mode by default.

Example:
    $ devlink dev param set pci/0000:00:0b.0 name esw_multiport value 1 \
                  cmode runtime

Signed-off-by: Roi Dayan <roid@nvidia.com>
Reviewed-by: Maor Dickman <maord@nvidia.com>
Signed-off-by: Saeed Mahameed <saeedm@nvidia.com>

Documentation/networking/devlink/mlx5.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

====================
mlx5 devlink support
====================

This document describes the devlink features implemented by the ``mlx5``
device driver.

Parameters
==========

.. list-table:: Generic parameters implemented

   * - Name
     - Mode
     - Validation
   * - ``enable_roce``
     - driverinit
     - Type: Boolean
   * - ``io_eq_size``
     - driverinit
     - The range is between 64 and 4096.
   * - ``event_eq_size``
     - driverinit
     - The range is between 64 and 4096.
   * - ``max_macs``
     - driverinit
     - The range is between 1 and 2^31. Only power of 2 values are supported.

The ``mlx5`` driver also implements the following driver-specific
parameters.

.. list-table:: Driver-specific parameters implemented
   :widths: 5 5 5 85

   * - Name
     - Type
     - Mode
     - Description
   * - ``flow_steering_mode``
     - string
     - runtime
     - Controls the flow steering mode of the driver

       * ``dmfs`` Device managed flow steering. In DMFS mode, the HW
         steering entities are created and managed through firmware.
       * ``smfs`` Software managed flow steering. In SMFS mode, the HW
         steering entities are created and manage through the driver without
         firmware intervention.
   * - ``fdb_large_groups``
     - u32
     - driverinit
     - Control the number of large groups (size > 1) in the FDB table.

       * The default value is 15, and the range is between 1 and 1024.
   * - ``esw_multiport``
     - Boolean
     - runtime
     - Control MultiPort E-Switch shared fdb mode.

       An experimental mode where a single E-Switch is used and all the vports
       and physical ports on the NIC are connected to it.

       An example is to send traffic from a VF that is created on PF0 to an
       uplink that is natively associated with the uplink of PF1

       Note: Future devices, ConnectX-8 and onward, will eventually have this
       as the default to allow forwarding between all NIC ports in a single
       E-switch environment and the dual E-switch mode will likely get
       deprecated.

       Default: disabled


The ``mlx5`` driver supports reloading via ``DEVLINK_CMD_RELOAD``

Info versions
=============

The ``mlx5`` driver reports the following versions

.. list-table:: devlink info versions implemented
   :widths: 5 5 90

   * - Name
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``fw.psid``
     - fixed
     - Used to represent the board id of the device.
   * - ``fw.version``
     - stored, running
     - Three digit major.minor.subminor firmware version number.
