Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/index.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=================================
KUnit - Linux Kernel Unit Testing
=================================

.. toctree::
	:maxdepth: 2
	:caption: Contents:

	start
	architecture
	run_wrapper
	run_manual
	usage
	kunit-tool
	api/index
	style
	faq
	tips
	running_tips

This section details the kernel unit testing framework.

Introduction
============

KUnit (Kernel unit testing framework) provides a common framework for
unit tests within the Linux kernel. Using KUnit, you can define groups
of test cases called test suites. The tests either run on kernel boot
if built-in, or load as a module. KUnit automatically flags and reports
failed test cases in the kernel log. The test results appear in `TAP
(Test Anything Protocol) format <https://testanything.org/>`_. It is inspired by
JUnit, Python’s unittest.mock, and GoogleTest/GoogleMock (C++ unit testing
framework).

KUnit tests are part of the kernel, written in the C (programming)
language, and test parts of the Kernel implementation (example: a C
language function). Excluding build time, from invocation to
completion, KUnit can run around 100 tests in less than 10 seconds.
KUnit can test any kernel component, for example: file system, system
calls, memory management, device drivers and so on.

KUnit follows the white-box testing approach. The test has access to
internal system functionality. KUnit runs in kernel space and is not
restricted to things exposed to user-space.

In addition, KUnit has kunit_tool, a script (``tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py``)
that configures the Linux kernel, runs KUnit tests under QEMU or UML (`User Mode
Linux <http://user-mode-linux.sourceforge.net/>`_), parses the test results and
displays them in a user friendly manner.

Features
--------

- Provides a framework for writing unit tests.
- Runs tests on any kernel architecture.
- Runs a test in milliseconds.

Prerequisites
-------------

- Any Linux kernel compatible hardware.
- For Kernel under test, Linux kernel version 5.5 or greater.

Unit Testing
============

A unit test tests a single unit of code in isolation. A unit test is the finest
granularity of testing and allows all possible code paths to be tested in the
code under test. This is possible if the code under test is small and does not
have any external dependencies outside of the test's control like hardware.


Write Unit Tests
----------------

To write good unit tests, there is a simple but powerful pattern:
Arrange-Act-Assert. This is a great way to structure test cases and
defines an order of operations.

- Arrange inputs and targets: At the start of the test, arrange the data
  that allows a function to work. Example: initialize a statement or
  object.
- Act on the target behavior: Call your function/code under test.
- Assert expected outcome: Verify that the result (or resulting state) is as
  expected.

Unit Testing Advantages
-----------------------

- Increases testing speed and development in the long run.
- Detects bugs at initial stage and therefore decreases bug fix cost
  compared to acceptance testing.
- Improves code quality.
- Encourages writing testable code.

How do I use it?
================

*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/start.rst - for KUnit new users.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/architecture.rst - KUnit architecture.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/run_wrapper.rst - run kunit_tool.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/run_manual.rst - run tests without kunit_tool.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/usage.rst - write tests.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/tips.rst - best practices with
    examples.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/api/index.rst - KUnit APIs
    used for testing.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/kunit-tool.rst - kunit_tool helper
    script.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/faq.rst - KUnit common questions and
    answers.

Commit message:

ANDROID: GKI: Document GKI KUnit differences
Added details for the new kernel parameter, kunit.enable, and
added a deviation warning at the top-level of the KUnit documentaion.

Bug: 231160619
Signed-off-by: Joe Fradley <joefradley@google.com>
Change-Id: Ia608bda8cd8c4a8a2d7ba84d02ea5c8fd6a6a99c

Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/index.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=================================
KUnit - Linux Kernel Unit Testing
=================================

.. toctree::
	:maxdepth: 2
	:caption: Contents:

	start
	architecture
	run_wrapper
	run_manual
	usage
	kunit-tool
	api/index
	style
	faq
	tips
	running_tips

.. warning::
	AOSP only supports running tests loaded with modules. Built-in
	test execution support has been disabled. In addition, in order
	to fully enable running module loaded tests both CONFIG_KUNIT
	needs to be enabled and kernel command line  argument
	`kunit.enable` needs to be set to 1.

	The remaining KUnit documentation has been left as-is.

This section details the kernel unit testing framework.

Introduction
============

KUnit (Kernel unit testing framework) provides a common framework for
unit tests within the Linux kernel. Using KUnit, you can define groups
of test cases called test suites. The tests either run on kernel boot
if built-in, or load as a module. KUnit automatically flags and reports
failed test cases in the kernel log. The test results appear in `TAP
(Test Anything Protocol) format <https://testanything.org/>`_. It is inspired by
JUnit, Python’s unittest.mock, and GoogleTest/GoogleMock (C++ unit testing
framework).

KUnit tests are part of the kernel, written in the C (programming)
language, and test parts of the Kernel implementation (example: a C
language function). Excluding build time, from invocation to
completion, KUnit can run around 100 tests in less than 10 seconds.
KUnit can test any kernel component, for example: file system, system
calls, memory management, device drivers and so on.

KUnit follows the white-box testing approach. The test has access to
internal system functionality. KUnit runs in kernel space and is not
restricted to things exposed to user-space.

In addition, KUnit has kunit_tool, a script (``tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py``)
that configures the Linux kernel, runs KUnit tests under QEMU or UML (`User Mode
Linux <http://user-mode-linux.sourceforge.net/>`_), parses the test results and
displays them in a user friendly manner.

Features
--------

- Provides a framework for writing unit tests.
- Runs tests on any kernel architecture.
- Runs a test in milliseconds.

Prerequisites
-------------

- Any Linux kernel compatible hardware.
- For Kernel under test, Linux kernel version 5.5 or greater.

Unit Testing
============

A unit test tests a single unit of code in isolation. A unit test is the finest
granularity of testing and allows all possible code paths to be tested in the
code under test. This is possible if the code under test is small and does not
have any external dependencies outside of the test's control like hardware.


Write Unit Tests
----------------

To write good unit tests, there is a simple but powerful pattern:
Arrange-Act-Assert. This is a great way to structure test cases and
defines an order of operations.

- Arrange inputs and targets: At the start of the test, arrange the data
  that allows a function to work. Example: initialize a statement or
  object.
- Act on the target behavior: Call your function/code under test.
- Assert expected outcome: Verify that the result (or resulting state) is as
  expected.

Unit Testing Advantages
-----------------------

- Increases testing speed and development in the long run.
- Detects bugs at initial stage and therefore decreases bug fix cost
  compared to acceptance testing.
- Improves code quality.
- Encourages writing testable code.

How do I use it?
================

*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/start.rst - for KUnit new users.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/architecture.rst - KUnit architecture.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/run_wrapper.rst - run kunit_tool.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/run_manual.rst - run tests without kunit_tool.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/usage.rst - write tests.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/tips.rst - best practices with
    examples.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/api/index.rst - KUnit APIs
    used for testing.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/kunit-tool.rst - kunit_tool helper
    script.
*   Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/faq.rst - KUnit common questions and
    answers.
