.TH "Heimdal Kerberos 5 PAC handling functions" 3 "11 Jan 2012" "Version 1.5.2" "HeimdalKerberos5library" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
Heimdal Kerberos 5 PAC handling functions \- 
.SS "Functions"

.in +1c
.ti -1c
.RI "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL \fBkrb5_pac_get_buffer\fP (krb5_context context, krb5_pac p, uint32_t type, krb5_data *data)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL \fBkrb5_pac_verify\fP (krb5_context context, const krb5_pac pac, time_t authtime, krb5_const_principal principal, const krb5_keyblock *server, const krb5_keyblock *privsvr)"
.br
.in -1c
.SH "Detailed Description"
.PP 

.SH "Function Documentation"
.PP 
.SS "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL krb5_pac_get_buffer (krb5_context context, krb5_pac p, uint32_t type, krb5_data * data)"
.PP
Get the PAC buffer of specific type from the pac.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIcontext\fP Kerberos 5 context. 
.br
\fIp\fP the pac structure returned by krb5_pac_parse(). 
.br
\fItype\fP type of buffer to get 
.br
\fIdata\fP return data, free with \fBkrb5_data_free()\fP.
.RE
.PP
\fBReturns:\fP
.RS 4
Returns 0 to indicate success. Otherwise an kerberos et error code is returned, see krb5_get_error_message(). 
.RE
.PP

.SS "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL krb5_pac_verify (krb5_context context, const krb5_pac pac, time_t authtime, krb5_const_principal principal, const krb5_keyblock * server, const krb5_keyblock * privsvr)"
.PP
Verify the PAC.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIcontext\fP Kerberos 5 context. 
.br
\fIpac\fP the pac structure returned by krb5_pac_parse(). 
.br
\fIauthtime\fP The time of the ticket the PAC belongs to. 
.br
\fIprincipal\fP the principal to verify. 
.br
\fIserver\fP The service key, most always be given. 
.br
\fIprivsvr\fP The KDC key, may be given.
.RE
.PP
\fBReturns:\fP
.RS 4
Returns 0 to indicate success. Otherwise an kerberos et error code is returned, see krb5_get_error_message(). 
.RE
.PP

