.TH "Heimdal Kerberos 5 error reporting functions" 3 "11 Jan 2012" "Version 1.5.2" "HeimdalKerberos5library" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
Heimdal Kerberos 5 error reporting functions \- 
.SS "Functions"

.in +1c
.ti -1c
.RI "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL \fBkrb5_eai_to_heim_errno\fP (int eai_errno, int system_error)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL \fBkrb5_h_errno_to_heim_errno\fP (int eai_errno)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION void KRB5_LIB_CALL \fBkrb5_clear_error_message\fP (krb5_context context)"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION void KRB5_LIB_CALL \fBkrb5_set_error_message\fP (krb5_context context, krb5_error_code ret, const char *fmt,...) __attribute__((format(printf"
.br
.ti -1c
.RI "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL \fBkrb5_vwarn\fP (krb5_context context, krb5_error_code code, const char *fmt, va_list ap) __attribute__((format(printf"
.br
.in -1c
.SH "Detailed Description"
.PP 

.SH "Function Documentation"
.PP 
.SS "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION void KRB5_LIB_CALL krb5_clear_error_message (krb5_context context)"
.PP
Clears the error message from the Kerberos 5 context.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIcontext\fP The Kerberos 5 context to clear 
.RE
.PP

.SS "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL krb5_eai_to_heim_errno (int eai_errno, int system_error)"
.PP
Convert the getaddrinfo() error code to a Kerberos et error code.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIeai_errno\fP contains the error code from getaddrinfo(). 
.br
\fIsystem_error\fP should have the value of errno after the failed getaddrinfo().
.RE
.PP
\fBReturns:\fP
.RS 4
Kerberos error code representing the EAI errors. 
.RE
.PP

.SS "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL krb5_h_errno_to_heim_errno (int eai_errno)"
.PP
Convert the gethostname() error code (h_error) to a Kerberos et error code.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIeai_errno\fP contains the error code from gethostname().
.RE
.PP
\fBReturns:\fP
.RS 4
Kerberos error code representing the gethostname errors. 
.RE
.PP

.SS "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION void KRB5_LIB_CALL krb5_set_error_message (krb5_context context, krb5_error_code ret, const char * fmt,  ...)"
.PP
Set the context full error string for a specific error code. The error that is stored should be internationalized.
.PP
The if context is NULL, no error string is stored.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIcontext\fP Kerberos 5 context 
.br
\fIret\fP The error code 
.br
\fIfmt\fP Error string for the error code 
.br
\fI...\fP printf(3) style parameters. 
.RE
.PP

.SS "KRB5_LIB_FUNCTION krb5_error_code KRB5_LIB_CALL krb5_vwarn (krb5_context context, krb5_error_code code, const char * fmt, va_list ap)"
.PP
Log a warning to the log, default stderr, include the error from the last failure.
.PP
\fBParameters:\fP
.RS 4
\fIcontext\fP A Kerberos 5 context. 
.br
\fIcode\fP error code of the last error 
.br
\fIfmt\fP message to print 
.br
\fIap\fP arguments 
.RE
.PP

