.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Alexey Zelkin <phantom@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 13, 2003
.Dt PTHREAD_MUTEXATTR_GETKIND_NP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_mutexattr_getkind_np ,
.Nm pthread_mutexattr_setkind_np
.Nd mutex attribute operations (legacy)
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread_np.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_mutexattr_getkind_np "pthread_mutexattr_t attr"
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_mutexattr_setkind_np "pthread_mutexattr_t *attr" "int kind"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bf -symbolic
These functions are deprecated and non-portable implementation of
the mutex type manipulation.
.Ef
.Pp
It is recommended to use the
.Xr pthread_mutexattr_gettype 3
and
.Xr pthread_mutexattr_settype 3
functions instead.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pthread_mutexattr_getkind_np
function returns a positive value representing the
.Dq kind
of the mutex attribute
.Fa attr
if successful; otherwise the value \-1 is returned and the global variable
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Pp
.Rv -std pthread_mutexattr_setkind_np
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_mutexattr_getkind_np
and
.Fn pthread_mutexattr_setkind_np
functions will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_mutex_destroy 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutex_init 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutexattr_gettype 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutexattr_settype 3
