.\" Copyright (c) 1996 John Birrell <jb@cimlogic.com.au>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by John Birrell.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 4, 1996
.Dt PTHREAD_GETSPECIFIC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_getspecific
.Nd get a thread-specific data value
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft void *
.Fn pthread_getspecific "pthread_key_t key"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_getspecific
function returns the value currently bound to the specified
.Fa key
on behalf of the calling thread.
.Pp
The effect of calling
.Fn pthread_getspecific
with a
.Fa key
value not obtained from
.Fn pthread_key_create
or after
.Fa key
has been deleted with
.Fn pthread_key_delete
is undefined.
.Pp
The
.Fn pthread_getspecific
function may be called from a thread-specific data destructor function.
A call to
.Fn pthread_getspecific
for the thread-specific data key being destroyed returns the value NULL,
unless the value is changed (after the destructor starts) by a call to
.Fn pthread_setspecific .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pthread_getspecific
function will return the thread-specific data value associated with the given
.Fa key .
If no thread-specific data value is associated with
.Fa key ,
then the value NULL is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
None.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_key_create 3 ,
.Xr pthread_key_delete 3 ,
.Xr pthread_setspecific 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_getspecific
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
