.\" Copyright (c) 1996 John Birrell <jb@cimlogic.com.au>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by John Birrell.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 4, 1996
.Dt PTHREAD_KEY_CREATE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_key_create
.Nd thread-specific data key creation
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_key_create "pthread_key_t *key" "void (*destructor)(void *)"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_key_create
function creates a thread-specific data key visible to all threads in the
process.
Key values provided by
.Fn pthread_key_create
are opaque objects used to locate thread-specific data.
Although the same
key value may be used by different threads, the values bound to the key
by
.Fn pthread_setspecific
are maintained on a per-thread basis and persist for the life of the calling
thread.
.Pp
Upon key creation, the value NULL is associated with the new key in all
active threads.
Upon thread creation, the value NULL is associated with all
defined keys in the new thread.
.Pp
An optional destructor function may be associated with each key value.
At
thread exit, if a key value has a non-NULL destructor pointer, and the
thread has a non-NULL value associated with the key, the function pointed
to is called with the current associated value as its sole argument.
The
order of destructor calls is unspecified if more than one destructor exists
for a thread when it exits.
.Pp
If, after all the destructors have been called for all non-NULL values
with associated destructors, there are still some non-NULL values with
associated destructors, then the process is repeated.
If, after at least
[PTHREAD_DESTRUCTOR_ITERATIONS] iterations of destructor calls for
outstanding non-NULL values, there are still some non-NULL values with
associated destructors, the implementation stops calling destructors.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_key_create
function will store the newly created key value at the location specified by
.Fa key
and returns zero.
Otherwise an error number will be returned to indicate
the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_key_create
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
The system lacked the necessary resources to create another thread-specific
data key, or the system-imposed limit on the total number of keys per process
[PTHREAD_KEYS_MAX] would be exceeded.
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Insufficient memory exists to create the key.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_getspecific 3 ,
.Xr pthread_key_delete 3 ,
.Xr pthread_setspecific 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_key_create
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
