.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Brian Cully <shmit@kublai.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 29, 2016
.Dt PTHREAD_MUTEX_LOCK 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_mutex_lock
.Nd lock a mutex
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_mutex_lock "pthread_mutex_t *mutex"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_mutex_lock
function locks
.Fa mutex .
If the mutex is already locked, the calling thread will block until the
mutex becomes available.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
.Fn pthread_mutex_lock
will return zero, otherwise an error number will be returned to
indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_mutex_lock
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width "Er ENOTRECOVERABLE"
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa mutex
is invalid.
.It Bq Er EDEADLK
A deadlock would occur if the thread blocked waiting for
.Fa mutex .
.It Bq Er EOWNERDEAD
The argument
.Fa mutex
points to a robust mutex and the previous owning thread terminated
while holding the mutex lock.
The lock was granted to the caller and it is up to the new owner
to make the state consistent.
.It Bq Er ENOTRECOVERABLE
The state protected by the
.Fa mutex
is not recoverable.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_mutex_consistent 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutex_destroy 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutex_init 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutex_trylock 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutex_unlock 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_mutex_lock
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
