.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Alexey Zelkin <phantom@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 5, 2016
.Dt PTHREAD_SUSPEND_ALL_NP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_suspend_all_np
.Nd suspend all active threads
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread_np.h
.Ft void
.Fn pthread_suspend_all_np void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_suspend_all_np
function causes all active threads to be suspended.
The only exception is the current thread,
the thread that called the
.Fn pthread_suspend_all_np
function.
.Pp
It is not safe for the caller of the
.Fn pthread_suspend_all_np
function to use any non-async signal safe functions, besides
.Xr pthread_resume_all_np 3 ,
until threads are resumed, unless measures are taken to ensure
that all threads are suspended at safe points.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_resume_all_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_resume_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_suspend_np 3
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alexey Zelkin Aq Mt phantom@FreeBSD.org .
