.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Alexey Zelkin <phantom@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 12, 2018
.Dt PTHREAD_SET_NAME_NP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_get_name_np ,
.Nm pthread_set_name_np
.Nd set and retrieve the thread name
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread_np.h
.Ft void
.Fn pthread_get_name_np "pthread_t thread" "char *name" "size_t len"
.Ft void
.Fn pthread_set_name_np "pthread_t thread" "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_set_name_np
function applies a copy of the given
.Fa name
to the given
.Fa thread .
.Pp
The
.Fn pthread_get_name_np
function retrieves the
.Fa name
associated with
.Fa thread .
If
.Fn pthread_set_name_np
was not previously called for
.Fa thread ,
the buffer pointed to by
.Fa name
will be empty.
.Sh ERRORS
Because of the debugging nature of these functions, all errors that may
appear inside are silently ignored.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr thr_set_name 2
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn pthread_set_name_np
and
.Fn pthread_get_name_np
are non-standard extensions.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alexey Zelkin Aq Mt phantom@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Yuri Pankov Aq Mt yuripv@yuripv.net .
