.\" Copyright (c) 2002,2003 Alexey Zelkin <phantom@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 31, 2003
.Dt PTHREAD_ATTR_GET_NP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_attr_get_np
.Nd get attributes of existent thread
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread_np.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_get_np "pthread_t pid" "pthread_attr_t *dst"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_attr_get_np
function is used to get existent thread's attributes.
Most fields of
.Vt pthread_attr_t
structure are exact values of attributes provided at thread creation
time (as parameter to
.Xr pthread_create 3
function), except for the stack address.
.Pp
Value returned as
.Fa dst
is supposed to be used in conjunction with
.Fn pthread_attr_get*
functions to retrieve individual values from
.Vt pthread_attr_t
structure.
Parameter
.Fa dst
should point to allocated memory area big enough to fit this structure.
.Pp
It is HIGHLY RECOMMENDED to use
.Xr pthread_attr_init 3
function to allocate attribute storage.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
.Fn pthread_attr_get_np
function will always return a pointer to the thread's real stack address,
regardless of its value in the original attributes structure.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
.Fn pthread_attr_get_np
function returns 0.
Otherwise, an error number is returned to indicate the error.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
size_t
my_thread_stack_size(pthread_t pid)
{
    pthread_attr_t attr;
    size_t size;

    pthread_attr_init(&attr);
    pthread_attr_get_np(pid, &attr);
    pthread_attr_getstacksize(&attr, &size);
    pthread_attr_destroy(&attr);
    return(size);
}
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_attr_get_np
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
Invalid value for one of given parameters.
.It Bq Er ESRCH
No thread could be found corresponding to that specified by the given
thread ID.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_attr_destroy 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getdetachstate 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getinheritsched 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getschedparam 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getschedpolicy 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getscope 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getstack 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getstackaddr 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_getstacksize 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_init 3
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn pthread_attr_get_np
function and this manual page were written by
.An Alexey Zelkin Aq Mt phantom@FreeBSD.org .
