.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Brian Cully <shmit@kublai.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 17, 2018
.Dt PTHREAD_COND_INIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_cond_init
.Nd create a condition variable
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_cond_init "pthread_cond_t *restrict cond" "const pthread_condattr_t *restrict attr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_cond_init
function creates a new condition variable, with attributes specified with
.Fa attr .
If
.Fa attr
is NULL the default attributes are used.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_cond_init
function will return zero and put the new condition variable id into
.Fa cond ,
otherwise an error number will be returned to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_cond_init
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
The process cannot allocate enough memory to create another condition
variable.
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
The system temporarily lacks the resources to create another condition
variable.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_cond_broadcast 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_destroy 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_signal 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_timedwait 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_wait 3 ,
.Xr pthread_condattr 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_cond_init
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
