.\" Copyright (c) 1996-1998 John Birrell <jb@cimlogic.com.au>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by John Birrell.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 4, 1996
.Dt PTHREAD_DETACH 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_detach
.Nd detach a thread
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_detach "pthread_t thread"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_detach
function is used to indicate to the implementation that storage for the
thread
.Fa thread
can be reclaimed when the thread terminates.
If
.Fa thread
has not terminated,
.Fn pthread_detach
will not cause it to terminate.
The effect of multiple
.Fn pthread_detach
calls on the same target thread is unspecified.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_detach
function will return zero.
Otherwise an error number will be returned to
indicate the error.
Note that the function does not change the value
of errno as it did for some drafts of the standard.
These early drafts
also passed a pointer to pthread_t as the argument.
Beware!
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_detach
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The implementation has detected that the value specified by
.Fa thread
does not refer to a joinable thread.
.It Bq Er ESRCH
No thread could be found corresponding to that specified by the given
thread ID,
.Fa thread .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_join 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_detach
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
