.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Brian Cully <shmit@kublai.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 9, 2010
.Dt PTHREAD_COND_TIMEDWAIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_cond_timedwait
.Nd "wait on a condition variable for a specific amount of time"
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_cond_timedwait "pthread_cond_t *cond" "pthread_mutex_t *mutex" "const struct timespec *abstime"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_cond_timedwait
function atomically blocks the current thread waiting on the condition
variable specified by
.Fa cond ,
and releases the mutex specified by
.Fa mutex .
The waiting thread unblocks only after another thread calls
.Xr pthread_cond_signal 3 ,
or
.Xr pthread_cond_broadcast 3
with the same condition variable, or if the system time reaches the
time specified in
.Fa abstime ,
and the current thread reacquires the lock on
.Fa mutex .
.Pp
The clock used to measure
.Fa abstime
can be specified during creation of the condition variable using
.Xr pthread_condattr_setclock 3 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_cond_timedwait
function will return zero.
Otherwise an error number will be returned to
indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_cond_timedwait
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa cond ,
.Fa mutex
or
.Fa abstime
is invalid.
.It Bq Er ETIMEDOUT
The system time has reached or exceeded the time specified in
.Fa abstime .
.It Bq Er EPERM
The specified
.Fa mutex
was not locked by the calling thread.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_cond_broadcast 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_destroy 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_init 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_signal 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cond_wait 3 ,
.Xr pthread_condattr_setclock 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_cond_timedwait
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
