.\" Copyright (C) 2000 Jason Evans <jasone@FreeBSD.org>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
.\" BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
.\" OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd February 19, 2011
.Dt PTHREAD_SIGMASK 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_sigmask
.Nd examine and/or change a thread's signal mask
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.In signal.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_sigmask "int how" "const sigset_t * restrict set" \
    "sigset_t * restrict oset"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_sigmask
function examines and/or changes the calling thread's signal mask.
.Pp
If
.Fa set
is not
.Dv NULL ,
it specifies a set of signals to be modified, and
.Fa how
specifies what to set the signal mask to:
.Bl -tag -width SIG_UNBLOCK
.It Dv SIG_BLOCK
Union of the current mask and
.Fa set .
.It Dv SIG_UNBLOCK
Intersection of the current mask and the complement of
.Fa set .
.It Dv SIG_SETMASK
.Fa set .
.El
.Pp
If
.Fa oset
is not NULL, the previous signal mask is stored in the location pointed to by
.Fa oset .
.Pp
.Dv SIGKILL
and
.Dv SIGSTOP
cannot be blocked, and will be silently ignored if included in the signal mask.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
.Fn pthread_sigmask
returns 0.
Otherwise, an error is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_sigmask
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa how
is not one of the defined values.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sigaction 2 ,
.Xr sigpending 2 ,
.Xr sigprocmask 2 ,
.Xr sigsuspend 2 ,
.Xr sigsetops 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_sigmask
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96
