.\" Copyright (c) 1996 John Birrell <jb@cimlogic.com.au>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by John Birrell.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 15, 2014
.Dt PTHREAD_EXIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_exit
.Nd terminate the calling thread
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft void
.Fn pthread_exit "void *value_ptr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_exit
function terminates the calling thread and makes the value
.Fa value_ptr
available to any successful join with the terminating thread.
Any
cancellation cleanup handlers that have been pushed and are not yet popped
are popped in the reverse order that they were pushed and then executed.
After all cancellation handlers have been executed, if the thread has any
thread-specific data, appropriate destructor functions are called in an
unspecified order.
Thread termination does not release any application
visible process resources, including, but not limited to, mutexes and
file descriptors, nor does it perform any process level cleanup
actions, including, but not limited to, calling
.Fn atexit
routines that may exist.
.Pp
An implicit call to
.Fn pthread_exit
is made when a thread other than the thread in which
.Fn main
was first invoked returns from the start routine that was used to create
it.
The function's return value serves as the thread's exit status.
.Pp
The behavior of
.Fn pthread_exit
is undefined if called from a cancellation handler or destructor function
that was invoked as the result of an implicit or explicit call to
.Fn pthread_exit .
.Pp
After a thread has terminated, the result of access to local (auto)
variables of the thread is undefined.
Thus, references to local variables
of the exiting thread should not be used for the
.Fn pthread_exit
.Fa value_ptr
parameter value.
.Pp
The process will exit with an exit status of 0 after the last thread has
been terminated.
The behavior is as if the implementation called
.Fn exit
with a zero argument at thread termination time.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pthread_exit
function cannot return to its caller.
.Sh ERRORS
None.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr _exit 2 ,
.Xr exit 3 ,
.Xr pthread_cancel 3 ,
.Xr pthread_create 3 ,
.Xr pthread_join 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_exit
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
