.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Brian Cully <shmit@kublai.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 25, 2014
.Dt PTHREAD_CLEANUP_PUSH 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_cleanup_push
.Nd add a cleanup function for thread exit
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft void
.Fn pthread_cleanup_push "void \*[lp]*cleanup_routine\*[rp]\*[lp]void *\*[rp]" "void *arg"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_cleanup_push
function adds
.Fa cleanup_routine
to the top of the stack of cleanup handlers that
get called when the current thread exits.
.Pp
When
.Fa cleanup_routine
is called, it is passed
.Fa arg
as its only argument.
.Pp
The
.Fn pthread_cleanup_push
function is implemented as a macro that opens a new block.
Invocations of this function must appear as standalone statements that are
paired with a later call of
.Xr pthread_cleanup_pop 3
in the same lexical scope.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pthread_cleanup_push
function does not return any value.
.Sh ERRORS
None
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_cleanup_pop 3 ,
.Xr pthread_exit 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_cleanup_push
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
