.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Alex Nash
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 4, 1998
.Dt PTHREAD_RWLOCK_DESTROY 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_rwlock_destroy
.Nd destroy a read/write lock
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_rwlock_destroy "pthread_rwlock_t *lock"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_rwlock_destroy
function is used to destroy a read/write lock previously created with
.Fn pthread_rwlock_init .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_rwlock_destroy
function will return zero.
Otherwise an error number will be returned
to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_rwlock_destroy
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EPERM
The caller does not have the privilege to perform the operation.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn pthread_rwlock_destroy
function may fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EBUSY
The system has detected an attempt to destroy the object referenced by
.Fa lock
while it is locked.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa lock
is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_rwlock_init 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_rwlock_destroy
function is expected to conform to
.St -susv2 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn pthread_rwlock_destroy
function first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
