.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1987, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Joerg Wunsch
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $OpenBSD: sysexits.3,v 1.13 2017/04/11 17:01:11 schwarze Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man3/sysexits.3,v 1.4.2.1 1999/08/29 16:45:41 peter Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: April 11 2017 $
.Dt SYSEXITS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sysexits
.Nd exit codes for programs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sysexits.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A few programs exit with the following non-portable error codes.
Do not use them.
.Pp
The successful exit is always indicated by a status of 0, or
.Dv EX_OK .
Error numbers begin at
.Dv EX__BASE
to reduce the possibility of clashing with other exit statuses that
random programs may already return.
The meaning of the code is approximately as follows:
.Bl -tag -width "EX_UNAVAILABLEXX(XX)"
.It Dv EX_USAGE Pq 64
The command was used incorrectly, e.g., with the wrong number of
arguments, a bad flag, bad syntax in a parameter, or whatever.
.It Dv EX_DATAERR Pq 65
The input data was incorrect in some way.
This should only be used for user's data and not system files.
.It Dv EX_NOINPUT Pq 66
An input file (not a system file) did not exist or was not readable.
This could also include errors like
.Dq \&No message
to a mailer (if it cared to catch it).
.It Dv EX_NOUSER Pq 67
The user specified did not exist.
This might be used for mail addresses or remote logins.
.It Dv EX_NOHOST Pq 68
The host specified did not exist.
This is used in mail addresses or network requests.
.It Dv EX_UNAVAILABLE Pq 69
A service is unavailable.
This can occur if a support program or file does not exist.
This can also be used as a catch-all message when something you wanted
to do doesn't work, but you don't know why.
.It Dv EX_SOFTWARE Pq 70
An internal software error has been detected.
This should be limited to non-operating system related errors if possible.
.It Dv EX_OSERR Pq 71
An operating system error has been detected.
This is intended to be used for such things as
.Dq cannot fork ,
or
.Dq cannot create pipe .
It includes things like
.Xr getuid 2
returning a user that does not exist in the passwd file.
.It Dv EX_OSFILE Pq 72
Some system file (e.g.,
.Pa /etc/passwd ,
.Pa /var/run/utmp )
does not exist, cannot be opened, or has some sort of error
(e.g., syntax error).
.It Dv EX_CANTCREAT Pq 73
A (user specified) output file cannot be created.
.It Dv EX_IOERR Pq 74
An error occurred while doing I/O on some file.
.It Dv EX_TEMPFAIL Pq 75
Temporary failure, indicating something that is not really an error.
For example that a mailer could not create a
connection, and the request should be reattempted later.
.It Dv EX_PROTOCOL Pq 76
The remote system returned something that was
.Dq not possible
during a protocol exchange.
.It Dv EX_NOPERM Pq 77
You did not have sufficient permission to perform the operation.
This is not intended for file system problems, which should use
.Dv EX_NOINPUT
or
.Dv EX_CANTCREAT ,
but rather for higher level permissions.
.It Dv EX_CONFIG Pq 78
Something was found in an unconfigured or misconfigured state.
.El
.Pp
The numerical values corresponding to the symbolical ones are given in
parentheses for easy reference.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr _exit 2 ,
.Xr exit 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file first appeared in
.Bx 4.0
for use by the delivermail utility, later renamed to
.Xr sendmail 8 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An Eric Allman
invented the
.Nm
file in 1980.
This man page was written by
.An Joerg Wunsch ,
based on Eric's original comments found in
.In sysexits.h .
.Sh BUGS
The choice of an appropriate exit value is often ambiguous.
