The cx2341x driver
==================

How to call the firmware API
----------------------------

The preferred calling convention is known as the firmware mailbox. The
mailboxes are basically a fixed length array that serves as the call-stack.

Firmware mailboxes can be located by searching the encoder and decoder memory
for a 16 byte signature. That signature will be located on a 256-byte boundary.

Signature:

.. code-block:: none

	0x78, 0x56, 0x34, 0x12, 0x12, 0x78, 0x56, 0x34,
	0x34, 0x12, 0x78, 0x56, 0x56, 0x34, 0x12, 0x78

The firmware implements 20 mailboxes of 20 32-bit words. The first 10 are
reserved for API calls. The second 10 are used by the firmware for event
notification.

  ====== =================
  Index  Name
  ====== =================
  0      Flags
  1      Command
  2      Return value
  3      Timeout
  4-19   Parameter/Result
  ====== =================


The flags are defined in the following table. The direction is from the
perspective of the firmware.

  ==== ========== ============================================
  Bit  Direction  Purpose
  ==== ========== ============================================
  2    O          Firmware has processed the command.
  1    I          Driver has finished setting the parameters.
  0    I          Driver is using this mailbox.
  ==== ========== ============================================

The command is a 32-bit enumerator. The API specifics may be found in this
chapter.

The return value is a 32-bit enumerator. Only two values are currently defined:

- 0=success
- -1=command undefined.

There are 16 parameters/results 32-bit fields. The driver populates these fields
with values for all the parameters required by the call. The driver overwrites
these fields with result values returned by the call.

The timeout value protects the card from a hung driver thread. If the driver
doesn't handle the completed call within the timeout specified, the firmware
will reset that mailbox.

To make an API call, the driver iterates over each mailbox looking for the
first one available (bit 0 has been cleared). The driver sets that bit, fills
in the command enumerator, the timeout value and any required parameters. The
driver then sets the parameter ready bit (bit 1). The firmware scans the
mailboxes for pending commands, processes them, sets the result code, populates
the result value array with that call's return values and sets the call
complete bit (bit 2). Once bit 2 is set, the driver should retrieve the results
and clear all the flags. If the driver does not perform this task within the
time set in the timeout register, the firmware will reset that mailbox.

Event notifications are sent from the firmware to the host. The host tells the
firmware which events it is interested in via an API call. That call tells the
firmware which notification mailbox to use. The firmware signals the host via
an interrupt. Only the 16 Results fields are used, the Flags, Command, Return
value and Timeout words are not used.


Encoder firmware API description
--------------------------------

CX2341X_ENC_PING_FW
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 128/0x80

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Does nothing. Can be used to check if the firmware is responding.



CX2341X_ENC_START_CAPTURE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 129/0x81

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Commences the capture of video, audio and/or VBI data. All encoding
parameters must be initialized prior to this API call. Captures frames
continuously or until a predefined number of frames have been captured.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Capture stream type:

	- 0=MPEG
	- 1=Raw
	- 2=Raw passthrough
	- 3=VBI


Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Bitmask:

	- Bit 0 when set, captures YUV
	- Bit 1 when set, captures PCM audio
	- Bit 2 when set, captures VBI (same as param[0]=3)
	- Bit 3 when set, the capture destination is the decoder
	  (same as param[0]=2)
	- Bit 4 when set, the capture destination is the host

.. note:: this parameter is only meaningful for RAW capture type.



CX2341X_ENC_STOP_CAPTURE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 130/0x82

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Ends a capture in progress

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=stop at end of GOP (generates IRQ)
- 1=stop immediate (no IRQ)

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Stream type to stop, see param[0] of API 0x81

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

Subtype, see param[1] of API 0x81



CX2341X_ENC_SET_AUDIO_ID
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 137/0x89

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assigns the transport stream ID of the encoded audio stream

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Audio Stream ID



CX2341X_ENC_SET_VIDEO_ID
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 139/0x8B

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Set video transport stream ID

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Video stream ID



CX2341X_ENC_SET_PCR_ID
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 141/0x8D

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assigns the transport stream ID for PCR packets

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

PCR Stream ID



CX2341X_ENC_SET_FRAME_RATE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 143/0x8F

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Set video frames per second. Change occurs at start of new GOP.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=30fps
- 1=25fps



CX2341X_ENC_SET_FRAME_SIZE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 145/0x91

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Select video stream encoding resolution.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Height in lines. Default 480

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Width in pixels. Default 720



CX2341X_ENC_SET_BIT_RATE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 149/0x95

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assign average video stream bitrate.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0=variable bitrate, 1=constant bitrate

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

bitrate in bits per second

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

peak bitrate in bits per second, divided by 400

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Mux bitrate in bits per second, divided by 400. May be 0 (default).

Param[4]
^^^^^^^^

Rate Control VBR Padding

Param[5]
^^^^^^^^

VBV Buffer used by encoder

.. note::

	#) Param\[3\] and Param\[4\] seem to be always 0
	#) Param\[5\] doesn't seem to be used.



CX2341X_ENC_SET_GOP_PROPERTIES
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 151/0x97

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Setup the GOP structure

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

GOP size (maximum is 34)

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Number of B frames between the I and P frame, plus 1.
For example: IBBPBBPBBPBB --> GOP size: 12, number of B frames: 2+1 = 3

.. note::

	GOP size must be a multiple of (B-frames + 1).



CX2341X_ENC_SET_ASPECT_RATIO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 153/0x99

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Sets the encoding aspect ratio. Changes in the aspect ratio take effect
at the start of the next GOP.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- '0000' forbidden
- '0001' 1:1 square
- '0010' 4:3
- '0011' 16:9
- '0100' 2.21:1
- '0101' to '1111' reserved



CX2341X_ENC_SET_DNR_FILTER_MODE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 155/0x9B

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assign Dynamic Noise Reduction operating mode

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Bit0: Spatial filter, set=auto, clear=manual
Bit1: Temporal filter, set=auto, clear=manual

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Median filter:

- 0=Disabled
- 1=Horizontal
- 2=Vertical
- 3=Horiz/Vert
- 4=Diagonal



CX2341X_ENC_SET_DNR_FILTER_PROPS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 157/0x9D

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

These Dynamic Noise Reduction filter values are only meaningful when
the respective filter is set to "manual" (See API 0x9B)

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Spatial filter: default 0, range 0:15

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Temporal filter: default 0, range 0:31



CX2341X_ENC_SET_CORING_LEVELS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 159/0x9F

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assign Dynamic Noise Reduction median filter properties.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Threshold above which the luminance median filter is enabled.
Default: 0, range 0:255

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Threshold below which the luminance median filter is enabled.
Default: 255, range 0:255

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

Threshold above which the chrominance median filter is enabled.
Default: 0, range 0:255

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Threshold below which the chrominance median filter is enabled.
Default: 255, range 0:255



CX2341X_ENC_SET_SPATIAL_FILTER_TYPE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 161/0xA1

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assign spatial prefilter parameters

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Luminance filter

- 0=Off
- 1=1D Horizontal
- 2=1D Vertical
- 3=2D H/V Separable (default)
- 4=2D Symmetric non-separable

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Chrominance filter

- 0=Off
- 1=1D Horizontal (default)



CX2341X_ENC_SET_VBI_LINE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 183/0xB7

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Selects VBI line number.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- Bits 0:4 	line number
- Bit  31		0=top_field, 1=bottom_field
- Bits 0:31 	all set specifies "all lines"

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

VBI line information features: 0=disabled, 1=enabled

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

Slicing: 0=None, 1=Closed Caption
Almost certainly not implemented. Set to 0.

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Luminance samples in this line.
Almost certainly not implemented. Set to 0.

Param[4]
^^^^^^^^

Chrominance samples in this line
Almost certainly not implemented. Set to 0.



CX2341X_ENC_SET_STREAM_TYPE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 185/0xB9

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assign stream type

.. note::

	Transport stream is not working in recent firmwares.
	And in older firmwares the timestamps in the TS seem to be
	unreliable.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=Program stream
- 1=Transport stream
- 2=MPEG1 stream
- 3=PES A/V stream
- 5=PES Video stream
- 7=PES Audio stream
- 10=DVD stream
- 11=VCD stream
- 12=SVCD stream
- 13=DVD_S1 stream
- 14=DVD_S2 stream



CX2341X_ENC_SET_OUTPUT_PORT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 187/0xBB

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assign stream output port. Normally 0 when the data is copied through
the PCI bus (DMA), and 1 when the data is streamed to another chip
(pvrusb and cx88-blackbird).

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=Memory (default)
- 1=Streaming
- 2=Serial

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Unknown, but leaving this to 0 seems to work best. Indications are that
this might have to do with USB support, although passing anything but 0
only breaks things.



CX2341X_ENC_SET_AUDIO_PROPERTIES
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 189/0xBD

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Set audio stream properties, may be called while encoding is in progress.

.. note::

	All bitfields are consistent with ISO11172 documentation except
	bits 2:3 which ISO docs define as:

	- '11' Layer I
	- '10' Layer II
	- '01' Layer III
	- '00' Undefined

	This discrepancy may indicate a possible error in the documentation.
	Testing indicated that only Layer II is actually working, and that
	the minimum bitrate should be 192 kbps.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Bitmask:

.. code-block:: none

	   0:1  '00' 44.1Khz
		'01' 48Khz
		'10' 32Khz
		'11' reserved

	   2:3  '01'=Layer I
		'10'=Layer II

	   4:7  Bitrate:
		     Index | Layer I     | Layer II
		     ------+-------------+------------
		    '0000' | free format | free format
		    '0001' |  32 kbit/s  |  32 kbit/s
		    '0010' |  64 kbit/s  |  48 kbit/s
		    '0011' |  96 kbit/s  |  56 kbit/s
		    '0100' | 128 kbit/s  |  64 kbit/s
		    '0101' | 160 kbit/s  |  80 kbit/s
		    '0110' | 192 kbit/s  |  96 kbit/s
		    '0111' | 224 kbit/s  | 112 kbit/s
		    '1000' | 256 kbit/s  | 128 kbit/s
		    '1001' | 288 kbit/s  | 160 kbit/s
		    '1010' | 320 kbit/s  | 192 kbit/s
		    '1011' | 352 kbit/s  | 224 kbit/s
		    '1100' | 384 kbit/s  | 256 kbit/s
		    '1101' | 416 kbit/s  | 320 kbit/s
		    '1110' | 448 kbit/s  | 384 kbit/s

		.. note::

			For Layer II, not all combinations of total bitrate
			and mode are allowed. See ISO11172-3 3-Annex B,
			Table 3-B.2

	   8:9  '00'=Stereo
		'01'=JointStereo
		'10'=Dual
		'11'=Mono

		.. note::

			The cx23415 cannot decode Joint Stereo properly.

	  10:11 Mode Extension used in joint_stereo mode.
		In Layer I and II they indicate which subbands are in
		intensity_stereo. All other subbands are coded in stereo.
		    '00' subbands 4-31 in intensity_stereo, bound==4
		    '01' subbands 8-31 in intensity_stereo, bound==8
		    '10' subbands 12-31 in intensity_stereo, bound==12
		    '11' subbands 16-31 in intensity_stereo, bound==16

	  12:13 Emphasis:
		    '00' None
		    '01' 50/15uS
		    '10' reserved
		    '11' CCITT J.17

	  14 	CRC:
		    '0' off
		    '1' on

	  15    Copyright:
		    '0' off
		    '1' on

	  16    Generation:
		    '0' copy
		    '1' original



CX2341X_ENC_HALT_FW
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 195/0xC3

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

The firmware is halted and no further API calls are serviced until the
firmware is uploaded again.



CX2341X_ENC_GET_VERSION
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 196/0xC4

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns the version of the encoder firmware.

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Version bitmask:
- Bits  0:15 build
- Bits 16:23 minor
- Bits 24:31 major



CX2341X_ENC_SET_GOP_CLOSURE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 197/0xC5

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Assigns the GOP open/close property.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=Open
- 1=Closed



CX2341X_ENC_GET_SEQ_END
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 198/0xC6

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Obtains the sequence end code of the encoder's buffer. When a capture
is started a number of interrupts are still generated, the last of
which will have Result[0] set to 1 and Result[1] will contain the size
of the buffer.

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

State of the transfer (1 if last buffer)

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

If Result[0] is 1, this contains the size of the last buffer, undefined
otherwise.



CX2341X_ENC_SET_PGM_INDEX_INFO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 199/0xC7

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Sets the Program Index Information.
The information is stored as follows:

.. code-block:: c

	struct info {
		u32 length;		// Length of this frame
		u32 offset_low;		// Offset in the file of the
		u32 offset_high;	// start of this frame
		u32 mask1;		// Bits 0-2 are the type mask:
					// 1=I, 2=P, 4=B
					// 0=End of Program Index, other fields
					//   are invalid.
		u32 pts;		// The PTS of the frame
		u32 mask2;		// Bit 0 is bit 32 of the pts.
	};
	u32 table_ptr;
	struct info index[400];

The table_ptr is the encoder memory address in the table were
*new* entries will be written.

.. note:: This is a ringbuffer, so the table_ptr will wraparound.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Picture Mask:
- 0=No index capture
- 1=I frames
- 3=I,P frames
- 7=I,P,B frames

(Seems to be ignored, it always indexes I, P and B frames)

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Elements requested (up to 400)

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Offset in the encoder memory of the start of the table.

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

Number of allocated elements up to a maximum of Param[1]



CX2341X_ENC_SET_VBI_CONFIG
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 200/0xC8

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Configure VBI settings

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Bitmap:

.. code-block:: none

	    0    Mode '0' Sliced, '1' Raw
	    1:3  Insertion:
		     '000' insert in extension & user data
		     '001' insert in private packets
		     '010' separate stream and user data
		     '111' separate stream and private data
	    8:15 Stream ID (normally 0xBD)

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Frames per interrupt (max 8). Only valid in raw mode.

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

Total raw VBI frames. Only valid in raw mode.

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Start codes

Param[4]
^^^^^^^^

Stop codes

Param[5]
^^^^^^^^

Lines per frame

Param[6]
^^^^^^^^

Byte per line

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Observed frames per interrupt in raw mode only. Rage 1 to Param[1]

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

Observed number of frames in raw mode. Range 1 to Param[2]

Result[2]
^^^^^^^^^

Memory offset to start or raw VBI data



CX2341X_ENC_SET_DMA_BLOCK_SIZE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 201/0xC9

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Set DMA transfer block size

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

DMA transfer block size in bytes or frames. When unit is bytes,
supported block sizes are 2^7, 2^8 and 2^9 bytes.

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Unit: 0=bytes, 1=frames



CX2341X_ENC_GET_PREV_DMA_INFO_MB_10
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 202/0xCA

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns information on the previous DMA transfer in conjunction with
bit 27 of the interrupt mask. Uses mailbox 10.

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Type of stream

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

Address Offset

Result[2]
^^^^^^^^^

Maximum size of transfer



CX2341X_ENC_GET_PREV_DMA_INFO_MB_9
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 203/0xCB

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns information on the previous DMA transfer in conjunction with
bit 27 or 18 of the interrupt mask. Uses mailbox 9.

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Status bits:
- 0   read completed
- 1   write completed
- 2   DMA read error
- 3   DMA write error
- 4   Scatter-Gather array error

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

DMA type

Result[2]
^^^^^^^^^

Presentation Time Stamp bits 0..31

Result[3]
^^^^^^^^^

Presentation Time Stamp bit 32



CX2341X_ENC_SCHED_DMA_TO_HOST
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 204/0xCC

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Setup DMA to host operation

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Memory address of link list

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Length of link list (wtf: what units ???)

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

DMA type (0=MPEG)



CX2341X_ENC_INITIALIZE_INPUT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 205/0xCD

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Initializes the video input



CX2341X_ENC_SET_FRAME_DROP_RATE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 208/0xD0

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

For each frame captured, skip specified number of frames.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Number of frames to skip



CX2341X_ENC_PAUSE_ENCODER
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 210/0xD2

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

During a pause condition, all frames are dropped instead of being encoded.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=Pause encoding
- 1=Continue encoding



CX2341X_ENC_REFRESH_INPUT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 211/0xD3

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Refreshes the video input



CX2341X_ENC_SET_COPYRIGHT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 212/0xD4

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Sets stream copyright property

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^


- 0=Stream is not copyrighted
- 1=Stream is copyrighted



CX2341X_ENC_SET_EVENT_NOTIFICATION
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 213/0xD5

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Setup firmware to notify the host about a particular event. Host must
unmask the interrupt bit.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Event (0=refresh encoder input)

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Notification 0=disabled 1=enabled

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

Interrupt bit

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Mailbox slot, -1 if no mailbox required.



CX2341X_ENC_SET_NUM_VSYNC_LINES
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 214/0xD6

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Depending on the analog video decoder used, this assigns the number
of lines for field 1 and 2.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Field 1 number of lines:
- 0x00EF for SAA7114
- 0x00F0 for SAA7115
- 0x0105 for Micronas

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Field 2 number of lines:
- 0x00EF for SAA7114
- 0x00F0 for SAA7115
- 0x0106 for Micronas



CX2341X_ENC_SET_PLACEHOLDER
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 215/0xD7

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Provides a mechanism of inserting custom user data in the MPEG stream.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=extension & user data
- 1=private packet with stream ID 0xBD

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Rate at which to insert data, in units of frames (for private packet)
or GOPs (for ext. & user data)

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

Number of data DWORDs (below) to insert

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Custom data 0

Param[4]
^^^^^^^^

Custom data 1

Param[5]
^^^^^^^^

Custom data 2

Param[6]
^^^^^^^^

Custom data 3

Param[7]
^^^^^^^^

Custom data 4

Param[8]
^^^^^^^^

Custom data 5

Param[9]
^^^^^^^^

Custom data 6

Param[10]
^^^^^^^^^

Custom data 7

Param[11]
^^^^^^^^^

Custom data 8



CX2341X_ENC_MUTE_VIDEO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 217/0xD9

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Video muting

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Bit usage:

.. code-block:: none

	 0    	'0'=video not muted
		'1'=video muted, creates frames with the YUV color defined below
	 1:7  	Unused
	 8:15 	V chrominance information
	16:23 	U chrominance information
	24:31 	Y luminance information



CX2341X_ENC_MUTE_AUDIO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 218/0xDA

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Audio muting

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

- 0=audio not muted
- 1=audio muted (produces silent mpeg audio stream)



CX2341X_ENC_SET_VERT_CROP_LINE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 219/0xDB

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Something to do with 'Vertical Crop Line'

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

If saa7114 and raw VBI capture and 60 Hz, then set to 10001.
Else 0.



CX2341X_ENC_MISC
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 220/0xDC

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Miscellaneous actions. Not known for 100% what it does. It's really a
sort of ioctl call. The first parameter is a command number, the second
the value.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Command number:

.. code-block:: none

	 1=set initial SCR value when starting encoding (works).
	 2=set quality mode (apparently some test setting).
	 3=setup advanced VIM protection handling.
	   Always 1 for the cx23416 and 0 for cx23415.
	 4=generate DVD compatible PTS timestamps
	 5=USB flush mode
	 6=something to do with the quantization matrix
	 7=set navigation pack insertion for DVD: adds 0xbf (private stream 2)
	   packets to the MPEG. The size of these packets is 2048 bytes (including
	   the header of 6 bytes: 0x000001bf + length). The payload is zeroed and
	   it is up to the application to fill them in. These packets are apparently
	   inserted every four frames.
	 8=enable scene change detection (seems to be a failure)
	 9=set history parameters of the video input module
	10=set input field order of VIM
	11=set quantization matrix
	12=reset audio interface after channel change or input switch (has no argument).
	   Needed for the cx2584x, not needed for the mspx4xx, but it doesn't seem to
	   do any harm calling it regardless.
	13=set audio volume delay
	14=set audio delay


Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Command value.

Decoder firmware API description
--------------------------------

.. note:: this API is part of the decoder firmware, so it's cx23415 only.



CX2341X_DEC_PING_FW
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 0/0x00

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

This API call does nothing. It may be used to check if the firmware
is responding.



CX2341X_DEC_START_PLAYBACK
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 1/0x01

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Begin or resume playback.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0 based frame number in GOP to begin playback from.

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Specifies the number of muted audio frames to play before normal
audio resumes. (This is not implemented in the firmware, leave at 0)



CX2341X_DEC_STOP_PLAYBACK
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 2/0x02

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Ends playback and clears all decoder buffers. If PTS is not zero,
playback stops at specified PTS.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Display 0=last frame, 1=black

.. note::

	this takes effect immediately, so if you want to wait for a PTS,
	then use '0', otherwise the screen goes to black at once.
	You can call this later (even if there is no playback) with a 1 value
	to set the screen to black.

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

PTS low

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

PTS high



CX2341X_DEC_SET_PLAYBACK_SPEED
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 3/0x03

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Playback stream at speed other than normal. There are two modes of
operation:

	- Smooth: host transfers entire stream and firmware drops unused
	  frames.
	- Coarse: host drops frames based on indexing as required to achieve
	  desired speed.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: none

	Bitmap:
	    0:7  0 normal
		 1 fast only "1.5 times"
		 n nX fast, 1/nX slow
	    30   Framedrop:
		     '0' during 1.5 times play, every other B frame is dropped
		     '1' during 1.5 times play, stream is unchanged (bitrate
			 must not exceed 8mbps)
	    31   Speed:
		     '0' slow
		     '1' fast

.. note::

	n is limited to 2. Anything higher does not result in
	faster playback. Instead the host should start dropping frames.

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Direction: 0=forward, 1=reverse

.. note::

	to make reverse playback work you have to write full GOPs in
	reverse order.

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: none

	Picture mask:
	    1=I frames
	    3=I, P frames
	    7=I, P, B frames

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

B frames per GOP (for reverse play only)

.. note::

	for reverse playback the Picture Mask should be set to I or I, P.
	Adding B frames to the mask will result in corrupt video. This field
	has to be set to the correct value in order to keep the timing correct.

Param[4]
^^^^^^^^

Mute audio: 0=disable, 1=enable

Param[5]
^^^^^^^^

Display 0=frame, 1=field

Param[6]
^^^^^^^^

Specifies the number of muted audio frames to play before normal audio
resumes. (Not implemented in the firmware, leave at 0)



CX2341X_DEC_STEP_VIDEO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 5/0x05

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Each call to this API steps the playback to the next unit defined below
in the current playback direction.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0=frame, 1=top field, 2=bottom field



CX2341X_DEC_SET_DMA_BLOCK_SIZE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 8/0x08

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Set DMA transfer block size. Counterpart to API 0xC9

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

DMA transfer block size in bytes. A different size may be specified
when issuing the DMA transfer command.



CX2341X_DEC_GET_XFER_INFO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 9/0x09

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

This API call may be used to detect an end of stream condition.

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Stream type

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

Address offset

Result[2]
^^^^^^^^^

Maximum bytes to transfer

Result[3]
^^^^^^^^^

Buffer fullness



CX2341X_DEC_GET_DMA_STATUS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 10/0x0A

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Status of the last DMA transfer

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Bit 1 set means transfer complete
Bit 2 set means DMA error
Bit 3 set means linked list error

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

DMA type: 0=MPEG, 1=OSD, 2=YUV



CX2341X_DEC_SCHED_DMA_FROM_HOST
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 11/0x0B

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Setup DMA from host operation. Counterpart to API 0xCC

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Memory address of link list

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Total # of bytes to transfer

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

DMA type (0=MPEG, 1=OSD, 2=YUV)



CX2341X_DEC_PAUSE_PLAYBACK
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 13/0x0D

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Freeze playback immediately. In this mode, when internal buffers are
full, no more data will be accepted and data request IRQs will be
masked.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Display: 0=last frame, 1=black



CX2341X_DEC_HALT_FW
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 14/0x0E

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

The firmware is halted and no further API calls are serviced until
the firmware is uploaded again.



CX2341X_DEC_SET_STANDARD
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 16/0x10

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Selects display standard

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0=NTSC, 1=PAL



CX2341X_DEC_GET_VERSION
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 17/0x11

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns decoder firmware version information

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Version bitmask:
	- Bits  0:15 build
	- Bits 16:23 minor
	- Bits 24:31 major



CX2341X_DEC_SET_STREAM_INPUT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 20/0x14

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Select decoder stream input port

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0=memory (default), 1=streaming



CX2341X_DEC_GET_TIMING_INFO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 21/0x15

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns timing information from start of playback

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

Frame count by decode order

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

Video PTS bits 0:31 by display order

Result[2]
^^^^^^^^^

Video PTS bit 32 by display order

Result[3]
^^^^^^^^^

SCR bits 0:31 by display order

Result[4]
^^^^^^^^^

SCR bit 32 by display order



CX2341X_DEC_SET_AUDIO_MODE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 22/0x16

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Select audio mode

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Dual mono mode action
	0=Stereo, 1=Left, 2=Right, 3=Mono, 4=Swap, -1=Unchanged

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Stereo mode action:
	0=Stereo, 1=Left, 2=Right, 3=Mono, 4=Swap, -1=Unchanged



CX2341X_DEC_SET_EVENT_NOTIFICATION
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 23/0x17

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Setup firmware to notify the host about a particular event.
Counterpart to API 0xD5

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Event:
	- 0=Audio mode change between mono, (joint) stereo and dual channel.
	- 3=Decoder started
	- 4=Unknown: goes off 10-15 times per second while decoding.
	- 5=Some sync event: goes off once per frame.

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

Notification 0=disabled, 1=enabled

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

Interrupt bit

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Mailbox slot, -1 if no mailbox required.



CX2341X_DEC_SET_DISPLAY_BUFFERS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 24/0x18

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Number of display buffers. To decode all frames in reverse playback you
must use nine buffers.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0=six buffers, 1=nine buffers



CX2341X_DEC_EXTRACT_VBI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 25/0x19

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Extracts VBI data

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0=extract from extension & user data, 1=extract from private packets

Result[0]
^^^^^^^^^

VBI table location

Result[1]
^^^^^^^^^

VBI table size



CX2341X_DEC_SET_DECODER_SOURCE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 26/0x1A

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Selects decoder source. Ensure that the parameters passed to this
API match the encoder settings.

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

Mode: 0=MPEG from host, 1=YUV from encoder, 2=YUV from host

Param[1]
^^^^^^^^

YUV picture width

Param[2]
^^^^^^^^

YUV picture height

Param[3]
^^^^^^^^

Bitmap: see Param[0] of API 0xBD



CX2341X_DEC_SET_PREBUFFERING
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enum: 30/0x1E

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

Decoder prebuffering, when enabled up to 128KB are buffered for
streams <8mpbs or 640KB for streams >8mbps

Param[0]
^^^^^^^^

0=off, 1=on

PVR350 Video decoder registers 0x02002800 -> 0x02002B00
-------------------------------------------------------

Author: Ian Armstrong <ian@iarmst.demon.co.uk>

Version: v0.4

Date: 12 March 2007


This list has been worked out through trial and error. There will be mistakes
and omissions. Some registers have no obvious effect so it's hard to say what
they do, while others interact with each other, or require a certain load
sequence. Horizontal filter setup is one example, with six registers working
in unison and requiring a certain load sequence to correctly configure. The
indexed colour palette is much easier to set at just two registers, but again
it requires a certain load sequence.

Some registers are fussy about what they are set to. Load in a bad value & the
decoder will fail. A firmware reload will often recover, but sometimes a reset
is required. For registers containing size information, setting them to 0 is
generally a bad idea. For other control registers i.e. 2878, you'll only find
out what values are bad when it hangs.

.. code-block:: none

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2800
	bit 0
		Decoder enable
		0 = disable
		1 = enable
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2804
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal Y alias register 1
	---------------
	2808
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal Y alias register 2
	---------------
	280C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal Y alias register 3
	---------------
	2810
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal Y alias register 4
	---------------
	2814
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal Y alias register 5
	---------------
	2818
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal Y alias trigger

	These six registers control the horizontal aliasing filter for the Y plane.
	The first five registers must all be loaded before accessing the trigger
	(2818), as this register actually clocks the data through for the first
	five.

	To correctly program set the filter, this whole procedure must be done 16
	times. The actual register contents are copied from a lookup-table in the
	firmware which contains 4 different filter settings.

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	281C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal UV alias register 1
	---------------
	2820
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal UV alias register 2
	---------------
	2824
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal UV alias register 3
	---------------
	2828
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal UV alias register 4
	---------------
	282C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal UV alias register 5
	---------------
	2830
	bits 0:31
		Decoder horizontal UV alias trigger

	These six registers control the horizontal aliasing for the UV plane.
	Operation is the same as the Y filter, with 2830 being the trigger
	register.

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2834
	bits 0:15
		Decoder Y source width in pixels

	bits 16:31
		Decoder Y destination width in pixels
	---------------
	2838
	bits 0:15
		Decoder UV source width in pixels

	bits 16:31
		Decoder UV destination width in pixels

	NOTE: For both registers, the resulting image must be fully visible on
	screen. If the image exceeds the right edge both the source and destination
	size must be adjusted to reflect the visible portion. For the source width,
	you must take into account the scaling when calculating the new value.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

	283C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder Y horizontal scaling
			Normally = Reg 2854 >> 2
	---------------
	2840
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - horizontal scaling
		Usually 0x00080514
	---------------
	2844
	bits 0:31
		Decoder UV horizontal scaling
		Normally = Reg 2854 >> 2
	---------------
	2848
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - horizontal scaling
		Usually 0x00100514
	---------------
	284C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - Y plane
		Usually 0x00200020
	---------------
	2850
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - UV plane
		Usually 0x00200020
	---------------
	2854
	bits 0:31
		Decoder 'master' value for horizontal scaling
	---------------
	2858
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown
		Usually 0
	---------------
	285C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown
		Normally = Reg 2854 >> 1
	---------------
	2860
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown
		Usually 0
	---------------
	2864
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown
		Normally = Reg 2854 >> 1
	---------------
	2868
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown
		Usually 0

	Most of these registers either control horizontal scaling, or appear linked
	to it in some way. Register 2854 contains the 'master' value & the other
	registers can be calculated from that one. You must also remember to
	correctly set the divider in Reg 2874.

	To enlarge:
		Reg 2854 = (source_width * 0x00200000) / destination_width
		Reg 2874 = No divide

	To reduce from full size down to half size:
		Reg 2854 = (source_width/2 * 0x00200000) / destination width
		Reg 2874 = Divide by 2

	To reduce from half size down to quarter size:
		Reg 2854 = (source_width/4 * 0x00200000) / destination width
		Reg 2874 = Divide by 4

	The result is always rounded up.

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	286C
	bits 0:15
		Decoder horizontal Y buffer offset

	bits 15:31
		Decoder horizontal UV buffer offset

	Offset into the video image buffer. If the offset is gradually incremented,
	the on screen image will move left & wrap around higher up on the right.

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2870
	bits 0:15
		Decoder horizontal Y output offset

	bits 16:31
		Decoder horizontal UV output offset

	Offsets the actual video output. Controls output alignment of the Y & UV
	planes. The higher the value, the greater the shift to the left. Use
	reg 2890 to move the image right.

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2874
	bits 0:1
		Decoder horizontal Y output size divider
		00 = No divide
		01 = Divide by 2
		10 = Divide by 3

	bits 4:5
		Decoder horizontal UV output size divider
		00 = No divide
		01 = Divide by 2
		10 = Divide by 3

	bit 8
		Decoder ?? unknown
		0 = Normal
		1 = Affects video output levels

	bit 16
		Decoder ?? unknown
		0 = Normal
		1 = Disable horizontal filter

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2878
	bit 0
		?? unknown

	bit 1
		osd on/off
		0 = osd off
		1 = osd on

	bit 2
		Decoder + osd video timing
		0 = NTSC
		1 = PAL

	bits 3:4
		?? unknown

	bit 5
		Decoder + osd
		Swaps upper & lower fields

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	287C
	bits 0:10
		Decoder & osd ?? unknown
		Moves entire screen horizontally. Starts at 0x005 with the screen
		shifted heavily to the right. Incrementing in steps of 0x004 will
		gradually shift the screen to the left.

	bits 11:31
		?? unknown

	Normally contents are 0x00101111 (NTSC) or 0x1010111d (PAL)

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2880  --------    ?? unknown
	2884  --------    ?? unknown
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2888
	bit 0
		Decoder + osd ?? unknown
		0 = Normal
		1 = Misaligned fields (Correctable through 289C & 28A4)

	bit 4
		?? unknown

	bit 8
		?? unknown

	Warning: Bad values will require a firmware reload to recover.
			Known to be bad are 0x000,0x011,0x100,0x111
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	288C
	bits 0:15
		osd ?? unknown
		Appears to affect the osd position stability. The higher the value the
		more unstable it becomes. Decoder output remains stable.

	bits 16:31
		osd ?? unknown
		Same as bits 0:15

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2890
	bits 0:11
		Decoder output horizontal offset.

	Horizontal offset moves the video image right. A small left shift is
	possible, but it's better to use reg 2870 for that due to its greater
	range.

	NOTE: Video corruption will occur if video window is shifted off the right
	edge. To avoid this read the notes for 2834 & 2838.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2894
	bits 0:23
		Decoder output video surround colour.

	Contains the colour (in yuv) used to fill the screen when the video is
	running in a window.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2898
	bits 0:23
		Decoder video window colour
		Contains the colour (in yuv) used to fill the video window when the
		video is turned off.

	bit 24
		Decoder video output
		0 = Video on
		1 = Video off

	bit 28
		Decoder plane order
		0 = Y,UV
		1 = UV,Y

	bit 29
		Decoder second plane byte order
		0 = Normal (UV)
		1 = Swapped (VU)

	In normal usage, the first plane is Y & the second plane is UV. Though the
	order of the planes can be swapped, only the byte order of the second plane
	can be swapped. This isn't much use for the Y plane, but can be useful for
	the UV plane.

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	289C
	bits 0:15
		Decoder vertical field offset 1

	bits 16:31
		Decoder vertical field offset 2

	Controls field output vertical alignment. The higher the number, the lower
	the image on screen. Known starting values are 0x011E0017 (NTSC) &
	0x01500017 (PAL)
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	28A0
	bits 0:15
		Decoder & osd width in pixels

	bits 16:31
		Decoder & osd height in pixels

	All output from the decoder & osd are disabled beyond this area. Decoder
	output will simply go black outside of this region. If the osd tries to
	exceed this area it will become corrupt.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	28A4
	bits 0:11
		osd left shift.

	Has a range of 0x770->0x7FF. With the exception of 0, any value outside of
	this range corrupts the osd.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	28A8
	bits 0:15
		osd vertical field offset 1

	bits 16:31
		osd vertical field offset 2

	Controls field output vertical alignment. The higher the number, the lower
	the image on screen. Known starting values are 0x011E0017 (NTSC) &
	0x01500017 (PAL)
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	28AC  --------    ?? unknown
	|
	V
	28BC  --------    ?? unknown
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	28C0
	bit 0
		Current output field
		0 = first field
		1 = second field

	bits 16:31
		Current scanline
		The scanline counts from the top line of the first field
		through to the last line of the second field.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	28C4  --------    ?? unknown
	|
	V
	28F8  --------    ?? unknown
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	28FC
	bit 0
		?? unknown
		0 = Normal
		1 = Breaks decoder & osd output
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2900
	bits 0:31
		Decoder vertical Y alias register 1
	---------------
	2904
	bits 0:31
		Decoder vertical Y alias register 2
	---------------
	2908
	bits 0:31
		Decoder vertical Y alias trigger

	These three registers control the vertical aliasing filter for the Y plane.
	Operation is similar to the horizontal Y filter (2804). The only real
	difference is that there are only two registers to set before accessing
	the trigger register (2908). As for the horizontal filter, the values are
	taken from a lookup table in the firmware, and the procedure must be
	repeated 16 times to fully program the filter.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	290C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder vertical UV alias register 1
	---------------
	2910
	bits 0:31
		Decoder vertical UV alias register 2
	---------------
	2914
	bits 0:31
		Decoder vertical UV alias trigger

	These three registers control the vertical aliasing filter for the UV
	plane. Operation is the same as the Y filter, with 2914 being the trigger.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2918
	bits 0:15
		Decoder Y source height in pixels

	bits 16:31
		Decoder Y destination height in pixels
	---------------
	291C
	bits 0:15
		Decoder UV source height in pixels divided by 2

	bits 16:31
		Decoder UV destination height in pixels

	NOTE: For both registers, the resulting image must be fully visible on
	screen. If the image exceeds the bottom edge both the source and
	destination size must be adjusted to reflect the visible portion. For the
	source height, you must take into account the scaling when calculating the
	new value.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2920
	bits 0:31
		Decoder Y vertical scaling
		Normally = Reg 2930 >> 2
	---------------
	2924
	bits 0:31
		Decoder Y vertical scaling
		Normally = Reg 2920 + 0x514
	---------------
	2928
	bits 0:31
		Decoder UV vertical scaling
		When enlarging = Reg 2930 >> 2
		When reducing = Reg 2930 >> 3
	---------------
	292C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder UV vertical scaling
		Normally = Reg 2928 + 0x514
	---------------
	2930
	bits 0:31
		Decoder 'master' value for vertical scaling
	---------------
	2934
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - Y vertical scaling
	---------------
	2938
	bits 0:31
		Decoder Y vertical scaling
		Normally = Reg 2930
	---------------
	293C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - Y vertical scaling
	---------------
	2940
	bits 0:31
		Decoder UV vertical scaling
		When enlarging = Reg 2930 >> 1
		When reducing = Reg 2930
	---------------
	2944
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - UV vertical scaling
	---------------
	2948
	bits 0:31
		Decoder UV vertical scaling
		Normally = Reg 2940
	---------------
	294C
	bits 0:31
		Decoder ?? unknown - UV vertical scaling

	Most of these registers either control vertical scaling, or appear linked
	to it in some way. Register 2930 contains the 'master' value & all other
	registers can be calculated from that one. You must also remember to
	correctly set the divider in Reg 296C

	To enlarge:
		Reg 2930 = (source_height * 0x00200000) / destination_height
		Reg 296C = No divide

	To reduce from full size down to half size:
		Reg 2930 = (source_height/2 * 0x00200000) / destination height
		Reg 296C = Divide by 2

	To reduce from half down to quarter.
		Reg 2930 = (source_height/4 * 0x00200000) / destination height
		Reg 296C = Divide by 4

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2950
	bits 0:15
		Decoder Y line index into display buffer, first field

	bits 16:31
		Decoder Y vertical line skip, first field
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2954
	bits 0:15
		Decoder Y line index into display buffer, second field

	bits 16:31
		Decoder Y vertical line skip, second field
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2958
	bits 0:15
		Decoder UV line index into display buffer, first field

	bits 16:31
		Decoder UV vertical line skip, first field
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	295C
	bits 0:15
		Decoder UV line index into display buffer, second field

	bits 16:31
		Decoder UV vertical line skip, second field
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2960
	bits 0:15
		Decoder destination height minus 1

	bits 16:31
		Decoder destination height divided by 2
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2964
	bits 0:15
		Decoder Y vertical offset, second field

	bits 16:31
		Decoder Y vertical offset, first field

	These two registers shift the Y plane up. The higher the number, the
	greater the shift.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2968
	bits 0:15
		Decoder UV vertical offset, second field

	bits 16:31
		Decoder UV vertical offset, first field

	These two registers shift the UV plane up. The higher the number, the
	greater the shift.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	296C
	bits 0:1
		Decoder vertical Y output size divider
		00 = No divide
		01 = Divide by 2
		10 = Divide by 4

	bits 8:9
		Decoder vertical UV output size divider
		00 = No divide
		01 = Divide by 2
		10 = Divide by 4
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2970
	bit 0
		Decoder ?? unknown
		0 = Normal
		1 = Affect video output levels

	bit 16
		Decoder ?? unknown
		0 = Normal
		1 = Disable vertical filter

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2974  --------   ?? unknown
	|
	V
	29EF  --------   ?? unknown
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A00
	bits 0:2
		osd colour mode
		000 = 8 bit indexed
		001 = 16 bit (565)
		010 = 15 bit (555)
		011 = 12 bit (444)
		100 = 32 bit (8888)

	bits 4:5
		osd display bpp
		01 = 8 bit
		10 = 16 bit
		11 = 32 bit

	bit 8
		osd global alpha
		0 = Off
		1 = On

	bit 9
		osd local alpha
		0 = Off
		1 = On

	bit 10
		osd colour key
		0 = Off
		1 = On

	bit 11
		osd ?? unknown
		Must be 1

	bit 13
		osd colour space
		0 = ARGB
		1 = AYVU

	bits 16:31
		osd ?? unknown
		Must be 0x001B (some kind of buffer pointer ?)

	When the bits-per-pixel is set to 8, the colour mode is ignored and
	assumed to be 8 bit indexed. For 16 & 32 bits-per-pixel the colour depth
	is honoured, and when using a colour depth that requires fewer bytes than
	allocated the extra bytes are used as padding. So for a 32 bpp with 8 bit
	index colour, there are 3 padding bytes per pixel. It's also possible to
	select 16bpp with a 32 bit colour mode. This results in the pixel width
	being doubled, but the color key will not work as expected in this mode.

	Colour key is as it suggests. You designate a colour which will become
	completely transparent. When using 565, 555 or 444 colour modes, the
	colour key is always 16 bits wide. The colour to key on is set in Reg 2A18.

	Local alpha works differently depending on the colour mode. For 32bpp & 8
	bit indexed, local alpha is a per-pixel 256 step transparency, with 0 being
	transparent and 255 being solid. For the 16bpp modes 555 & 444, the unused
	bit(s) act as a simple transparency switch, with 0 being solid & 1 being
	fully transparent. There is no local alpha support for 16bit 565.

	Global alpha is a 256 step transparency that applies to the entire osd,
	with 0 being transparent & 255 being solid.

	It's possible to combine colour key, local alpha & global alpha.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A04
	bits 0:15
		osd x coord for left edge

	bits 16:31
		osd y coord for top edge
	---------------
	2A08
	bits 0:15
		osd x coord for right edge

	bits 16:31
		osd y coord for bottom edge

	For both registers, (0,0) = top left corner of the display area. These
	registers do not control the osd size, only where it's positioned & how
	much is visible. The visible osd area cannot exceed the right edge of the
	display, otherwise the osd will become corrupt. See reg 2A10 for
	setting osd width.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A0C
	bits 0:31
		osd buffer index

	An index into the osd buffer. Slowly incrementing this moves the osd left,
	wrapping around onto the right edge
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A10
	bits 0:11
		osd buffer 32 bit word width

	Contains the width of the osd measured in 32 bit words. This means that all
	colour modes are restricted to a byte width which is divisible by 4.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A14
	bits 0:15
		osd height in pixels

	bits 16:32
		osd line index into buffer
		osd will start displaying from this line.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A18
	bits 0:31
		osd colour key

	Contains the colour value which will be transparent.
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A1C
	bits 0:7
		osd global alpha

	Contains the global alpha value (equiv ivtvfbctl --alpha XX)
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A20  --------    ?? unknown
	|
	V
	2A2C  --------    ?? unknown
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A30
	bits 0:7
		osd colour to change in indexed palette
	---------------
	2A34
	bits 0:31
		osd colour for indexed palette

	To set the new palette, first load the index of the colour to change into
	2A30, then load the new colour into 2A34. The full palette is 256 colours,
	so the index range is 0x00-0xFF
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A38  --------    ?? unknown
	2A3C  --------    ?? unknown
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A40
	bits 0:31
		osd ?? unknown

	Affects overall brightness, wrapping around to black
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A44
	bits 0:31
		osd ?? unknown

	Green tint
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A48
	bits 0:31
		osd ?? unknown

	Red tint
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A4C
	bits 0:31
		osd ?? unknown

	Affects overall brightness, wrapping around to black
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A50
	bits 0:31
		osd ?? unknown

	Colour shift
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A54
	bits 0:31
		osd ?? unknown

	Colour shift
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2A58  --------    ?? unknown
	|
	V
	2AFC  --------    ?? unknown
	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	2B00
	bit 0
		osd filter control
		0 = filter off
		1 = filter on

	bits 1:4
		osd ?? unknown

	--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

