.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2005-2017 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $OpenPAM: pam.conf.5 947 2019-02-24 20:18:17Z des $
.\"
.Dd February 24, 2019
.Dt PAM.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pam.conf
.Nd PAM policy file format
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The PAM library searches for policies in the following files, in
decreasing order of preference:
.Bl -enum
.It
.Pa /etc/pam.d/ Ns Ar service-name
.It
.Pa /etc/pam.conf
.It
.Pa /usr/local/etc/pam.d/ Ns Ar service-name
.It
.Pa /usr/local/etc/pam.conf
.El
.Pp
If none of these locations contains a policy for the given service,
the
.Dq Dv other
policy is used instead, if it exists.
.Pp
Entries in per-service policy files must be of one of the two forms
below:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Ar facility control-flag module-path Op Ar arguments ...
.Ar facility Cm include Ar other-service-name
.Ed
.Pp
Entries in
.Pa pam.conf Ns -style
policy files are of the same form, but are prefixed by an additional
field specifying the name of the service they apply to.
.Pp
In both cases, blank lines and comments introduced by a
.Ql #
sign are ignored, and the normal shell quoting rules apply.
The precise details of how the file is tokenized are described in
.Xr openpam_readword 3 .
.Pp
The
.Ar facility
field specifies the facility the entry applies to, and is one of:
.Bl -tag -width 12n
.It Cm auth
Authentication functions
.Po
.Xr pam_authenticate 3 ,
.Xr pam_setcred 3
.Pc
.It Cm account
Account management functions
.Pq Xr pam_acct_mgmt 3
.It Cm session
Session handling functions
.Po
.Xr pam_open_session 3 ,
.Xr pam_close_session 3
.Pc
.It Cm password
Password management functions
.Pq Xr pam_chauthtok 3
.El
.Pp
The
.Ar control-flag
field determines how the result returned by the module affects the
flow of control through (and the final result of) the rest of the
chain, and is one of:
.Bl -tag -width 12n
.It Cm required
If this module succeeds, the result of the chain will be success
unless a later module fails.
If it fails, the rest of the chain still runs, but the final result
will be failure regardless of the success of later modules.
.It Cm requisite
If this module succeeds, the result of the chain will be success
unless a later module fails.
If the module fails, the chain is broken and the result is failure.
.It Cm sufficient
If this module succeeds, the chain is broken and the result is
success.
If it fails, the rest of the chain still runs, but the final result
will be failure unless a later module succeeds.
.It Cm binding
If this module succeeds, the chain is broken and the result is
success.
If it fails, the rest of the chain still runs, but the final result
will be failure regardless of the success of later modules.
.It Cm optional
If this module succeeds, the result of the chain will be success
unless a later module fails.
If this module fails, the result of the chain will be failure unless a
later module succeeds.
.El
.Pp
There are two exceptions to the above:
.Cm sufficient
and
.Cm binding
modules are treated as
.Cm optional
by
.Xr pam_setcred 3 ,
and in the
.Dv PAM_PRELIM_CHECK
phase of
.Xr pam_chauthtok 3 .
.Pp
The
.Ar module-path
field specifies the name or full path of the module to call.
If only the name is specified, the PAM library will search for it in
the following locations:
.Bl -enum
.It
.Pa /usr/lib
.It
.Pa /usr/local/lib
.El
.Pp
The remaining fields, if any, are passed unmodified to the module if
and when it is invoked.
.Pp
The
.Cm include
form of entry causes entries from a different chain (specified by
.Ar other-system-name )
to be included in the current one.
This allows one to define system-wide policies which are then included
into service-specific policies.
The system-wide policy can then be modified without having to also
modify each and every service-specific policy.
.Pp
.Bf -symbolic
Take care not to introduce loops when using
.Cm include
rules, as there is currently no loop detection in place.
.Ef
.Sh MODULE OPTIONS
Some PAM library functions may alter their behavior when called by a
service module if certain module options were specified, regardless of
whether the module itself accords them any importance.
One such option is
.Cm debug ,
which causes the dispatcher to enable debugging messages before
calling each service function, and disable them afterwards (unless
they were already enabled).
Other special options include:
.Bl -tag -width 12n
.It Cm authtok_prompt Ns = Ns Ar prompt , Cm oldauthtok_prompt Ns = Ns Ar prompt , Cm user_prompt Ns = Ns Ar prompt
These options can be used to override the prompts used by
.Xr pam_get_authtok 3
and
.Xr pam_get_user 3 .
.It Cm echo_pass
This option controls whether
.Xr pam_get_authtok 3
will allow the user to see what they are typing.
.It Cm try_first_pass , Cm use_first_pass
These options control
.Xr pam_get_authtok 3 Ns 's
use of cached authentication tokens.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pam 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%T "X/Open Single Sign-On Service (XSSO) - Pluggable Authentication Modules"
.%D "June 1997"
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
The OpenPAM library was developed for the
.Fx
Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the
Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.\& under
DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.Pp
The OpenPAM library is maintained by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq Mt des@des.no .
