.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Poul-Henning Kamp <phk@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 23, 2003
.Dt CPU_ELAN 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm CPU_ELAN
.Nd AMD Elan 520 CPU support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options CPU_ELAN"
.Cd "options CPU_ELAN_PPS"
.Cd "options CPU_ELAN_XTAL"
.Bl -item -compact
.It
.Va machdep.elan_gpio_config
.It
.Va machdep.elan_freq
.El
.Cd "options CPU_SOEKRIS"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Cd "options CPU_ELAN"
enables support for the AMD Elan 520 CPU.
.Pp
A device
.Pa /dev/elan-mmcr
exports the MMCR register bank to userland
using
.Xr mmap 2 .
.Pp
The
.Tn i8254
timer will be adjusted to the slightly unorthodox
frequency 1189161 Hz (32768 * 45 * 25 / 31) employed by the Elan.
.Pp
A timecounter named
.Dq Li ELAN
is implemented using the general purpose timer 2,
but it will not be usable unless HZ is configured at 150 or higher.
This timecounter is much better than the
.Dq Li i8254
timecounter and should be
used at all times.
.Pp
The
.Va machdep.elan_gpio_config
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
enables configuration of the GPIO pins of the CPU.
The string must be exactly 32 characters long.
A
.Ql -
means the GPIO is unavailable.
A
.Ql l
(lower-case ell) configures a
.Xr led 4
device (active low).
A
.Ql L
configures a
.Xr led 4
device (active high).
A
.Ql \&.
means no configuration for this GPIO.
These
.Xr led 4
devices will be named
.Pa /dev/led/gpio%d .
For meaning of
.Ql P ,
.Ql e
and
.Ql E ,
see under
.Cd "options CPU_ELAN_PPS" .
.Pp
The
.Cd "options CPU_ELAN_XTAL"
and the
.Va machdep.elan_freq
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
can be used to set the CPU clock crystal frequency in Hz.
The default is 33333333 Hz.
.Pp
The
.Cd "options CPU_ELAN_PPS"
enables precision timestamping using the RFC2783 PPS-API via the
.Pa /dev/elan-mmcr
device.
The resolution will be approximately 125 nsec
and the precision \(+- 125 nsec.
(For 125 nsec read
.Dq "4 / CPU clock crystal frequency" . )
.Pp
The input signal must be connected to the TMR1IN pin and
a GPIO pin.
The GPIO pin must be configured with a
.Ql P
in
.Va machdep.elan_gpio_config .
.Pp
In addition, one GPIO pin can be configured with either
.Ql e
(active low)
or
.Ql E
(active high) to become a
.Dq echo
output of the input signal.
Please notice that this signal is not suitable for calibration.
.Pp
If the
.Cd "options CPU_SOEKRIS"
is given, the support will additionally be tailored to the
Soekris Engineering 45xx series of embedded computers.
The
.Dq error
led will be configured (as
.Pa /dev/led/error )
and the GPIO pins which are not
available will be disabled.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr led 4 ,
.Xr timecounters 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
code first appeared in
.Fx 4.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Poul-Henning Kamp Aq Mt phk@FreeBSD.org
