.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Michael Smith
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24 2018
.Dt CS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cs
.Nd "Ethernet device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device cs"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_cs_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.cs.0.at="isa"
.Cd hint.cs.0.port="0x300"
.Cd hint.cs.0.irq="10"
.Cd hint.cs.0.maddr="0xd000"
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for ISA Ethernet adapters based on the
.Tn Crystal Semiconductor CS8900
and
.Tn CS8920
NICs.
These devices are used on the
.Tn IBM EtherJet ISA
adapters and in many embedded applications where the high integration, small
size and low cost of the CS89x0 family compensate for their drawbacks.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver will obtain configuration parameters either from
.Pa /boot/device.hints
or from the card.
At least the I/O port number must be specified.
Other parameters specified in
.Pa /boot/device.hints
will be used if present;
the card may be soft-configured so these may be any valid
value.
Adapters based on the CS8920 normally offer PnP configuration and the driver
will detect the
.Tn IBM EtherJet
and the
.Tn CSC6040
adapters automatically.
.Pp
Note that the CS8900 is limited to 4 IRQ values; these are normally implemented
as 5, 10, 11 and 12.
The CS8920 has no such limitation.
.Pp
Memory-mapped and DMA operation are not supported at this time.
.Pp
In addition to the ISA devices, the PC Card devices based on the CS889x0
family are also supported.
The IBM EtherJet PCMCIA Card is the only known device based on this
chip.
The PC Card support does not need the above specific ISA hints to work.
The PC Card support may not work for 10base2 (thinnet) connections and may
bogusly claim to support 10base5 (there are no known cards that have an
AUI necessary for 10base5 support on their dongles).
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "cs%d: full/half duplex negotiation timeout"
The attempt to negotiate duplex settings with the hub timed out.
This may
indicate a cabling problem or a faulty or incompatible hub.
.It "cs%d: failed to enable <media>"
The CS89x0 failed to select the nominated media, either because it is not
present or not operating correctly.
.It "cs%d: No EEPROM, assuming defaults"
The CS89x0 does not have an EEPROM, or the EEPROM is hopelessly damaged.
Operation
will only be successful if the configuration entry lists suitable values for
the adapter.
.It "cs%d: Invalid irq"
The IRQ specified in the configuration entry is not valid for the adapter.
.It "cs%d: Could not allocate memory for NIC"
There is a critical memory shortage.
The adapter will not function.
.It "cs%d: Adapter has no media"
The adapter is not configured for a specific media type.
The media type will have
to be manually set.
.It "This is a %s, but LDN %d is disabled"
The PnP probe code found a recognised adapter, but the adapter is disabled.
.It "failed to read pnp parms"
A PnP adapter was found, but configuration parameters for it could not be read.
.It "failed to pnp card parameters"
The parameters obtained via PnP were not accepted by the driver.
The adapter
may not function.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Maxim Bolotin
and
.An Oleg Sharoiko .
This manpage was written by
.An Michael Smith .
.Sh CAVEATS
The CS89x0 family of adapters have a very small RAM buffer (4K).
This may
cause problems with extremely high network loads or bursty network traffic.
In particular, NFS operations should be limited to 1k read/write transactions
in order to avoid overruns.
