.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 David E. O'Brien
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2018
.Dt EX 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ex
.Nd "Ethernet device driver for the Intel EtherExpress Pro/10 and Pro/10+"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ex"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ex_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
i82595 chip.
.Pp
On the ISA bus, the card will be searched for in the
I/O address range 0x200 - 0x3a0.
The IRQ will be read from the EEPROM on the card.
For correct operation Plug-N-Play support should be disabled.
.Pp
On the PC Card bus, the card will be automatically recognized and
configured.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following Ethernet adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Intel EtherExpress Pro/10 ISA
.It
Intel EtherExpress Pro/10+ ISA
.It
Olicom OC2220 Ethernet PC Card
.It
Olicom OC2232 Ethernet/Modem PC Card
.It
Silicom Ethernet LAN PC Card
.It
Silicom EtherSerial LAN PC Card
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ex%d: Intel EtherExpress Pro/10, address %6D, connector %s"
The device probe found an installed card, and was able to correctly install
the device driver.
.It "ex%d: WARNING: board's EEPROM is configured for IRQ %d, using %d"
The device probe detected that the board is configured for a different
interrupt than the one specified in the kernel configuration file.
.It "ex%d: invalid IRQ."
The device probe detected an invalid IRQ setting.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Javier Mart\('in Rueda .
The PC Card attachment was written by
.An Mitsuru ISAWAKI
and
.An Warner Losh .
This manual page was written by
.An David E. O'Brien .
.Sh BUGS
Currently the driver does not support multicast.
.Pp
The Silicom EtherSerial card's serial port does not currently work.
The Olicom OC2232 PC Card should work with the
.Nm
driver, but is currently completely broken.
