.\"	$OpenBSD: gscpcib.4,v 1.9 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Alexander Yurchenko <grange@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt GSCPCIB 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gscpcib
.Nd National Semiconductor Geode SC1100 PCI-ISA bridge with GPIO
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "gscpcib* at pci?"
.Cd "isa* at gscpcib?"
.Cd "gpio* at gscpcib?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the National Semiconductor Geode SC1100
System-on-Chip
.Tn PCI-ISA
bridge.
This device is a
.Tn PCI-ISA
bridge, but with some additional sub-devices.
Besides the core functionality, the
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn GPIO
interface of this device.
.Pp
The device has 64 I/O pins which can be accessed
through the
.Xr gpio 4
framework.
The
.Xr gpioctl 8
program provides a convenient way to manipulate these pins from userland.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpio 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr gpioctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Alexander Yurchenko Aq Mt grange@openbsd.org .
