.\"	$OpenBSD: ichpcib.4,v 1.12 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Alexander Yurchenko <grange@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt ICHPCIB 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ichpcib
.Nd Intel ICHx/ICHx-M LPC bridges
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ichpcib* at pci?"
.Cd "isa* at ichpcib?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports Intel
.Tn ICH ,
.Tn ICH0 ,
.Tn ICH2 ,
.Tn ICH2-M ,
.Tn ICH3-S ,
.Tn ICH3-M ,
.Tn ICH4 ,
.Tn ICH4-M ,
.Tn ICH5 ,
.Tn ICH6 ,
.Tn ICH7 ,
.Tn ICH7-M ,
.Tn ICH8 ,
.Tn ICH8-M ,
.Tn ICH9 ,
.Tn 6300ESB
and
.Tn 6321ESB
LPC bridges.
These devices are mostly usual
.Tn PCI-ISA
bridges but with some additional power management and monitoring
capabilities.
Besides the core functionality, the
.Nm
driver provides support for the Intel SpeedStep technology, available
for the
.Tn ICH2-M ,
.Tn ICH3-M ,
and
.Tn ICH4-M
chipsets, and power management timer available for all chipsets.
It allows the user to control CPU frequency with the
.Xr sysctl 8
program.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cpu 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
Intel SpeedStep support for the ICHx-M chipsets first appeared in
.Ox 3.5
as part of the
.Xr pcib 4
driver.
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Alexander Yurchenko Aq Mt grange@openbsd.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
On some old machines with the
.Tn ICH2-M
chipset, Intel SpeedStep isn't available.
