.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001
.\" Kazutaka YOKOTA <yokota@zodiac.mech.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd September 20, 2001
.Dt PNPBIOS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pnpbios
.Nd support for embedded devices on the motherboard
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver enumerates embedded ISA devices on the motherboard whose BIOS
supports
.Dq "Plug and Play BIOS Specification" .
It assigns ISA bus resources (interrupt line, DMA channel, I/O ports,
and memory region) to each device and activates it.
.Pp
If it cannot assign necessary resources to a device without
causing conflict with other devices in the system,
the device will not be activated and will be unavailable
to programs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pnp 4
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A Compaq
.%A Phenix
.%A Intel
.%T "Plug and Play BIOS Specification Version 1.0A"
.%D May 5, 1994
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A Compaq
.%A Phenix
.%A Intel
.%T "Plug and Play BIOS CLARIFICATION Paper for Plug and Play BIOS Specification Version 1.0A"
.%D October 6, 1994
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mike Smith .
.Sh CAVEATS
There is no explicit way to disable individual embedded devices.
The
.Nm
driver will find all devices reported by the
.Dq "Plug and Play (PnP)"
BIOS and try to activate them all.
.Pp
There is no way to explicitly assign particular resource to a device.
The resource assignment is fully automatic and there is
no provision for manual override.
