.\"	$OpenBSD: sb.4,v 1.16 2016/08/31 13:54:58 jmc Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: sb.4,v 1.13 1997/10/31 15:02:33 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by John T. Kohl.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 31 2016 $
.Dt SB 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sb
.Nd SoundBlaster family audio device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "sb0 at isa? port 0x220 irq 5 drq 1"
.Cd "sb1 at isa? port 0x240 irq 7 drq 1 flags 1"
.Cd "sb* at isapnp?"
.Cd "audio* at sb?"
.Cd "midi* at sb?" Pq "MPU401 port"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the
SoundBlaster 16, Jazz 16, SoundBlaster AWE 32, SoundBlaster AWE 64,
and hardware register-level compatible audio cards.
.Pp
The SoundBlaster series are half-duplex cards, capable of 8- and 16-bit
audio sample recording and playback at rates up to 44.1kHz (depending on
the particular model).
.Pp
The base I/O port address is usually jumper-selected to either 0x220 or
0x240 (newer cards may provide software configuration, but this driver
does not directly support them--you must configure the card for its I/O
addresses with other software).
The SoundBlaster takes 16 I/O ports.
For the SoundBlaster and SoundBlaster Pro, the IRQ and DRQ channels are
jumper-selected.
For the SoundBlaster 16, the IRQ and DRQ channels are set by this driver
to the values specified in the config file.
The IRQ must be selected from the set {5,7,9,10}.
.Pp
The configuration file must set the value of
.Cm flags
to 1 to enable the Jazz16 support.
This is to avoid potential conflicts with other devices when probing the
Jazz 16 because it requires use of extra I/O ports not in the base port range.
.Pp
The joystick interface (if enabled by a jumper) is handled by the
.Xr joy 4
driver, and the optional SCSI CD-ROM interface is handled by the
.Xr aic 4
driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr aic 4 ,
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr isapnp 4 ,
.Xr joy 4 ,
.Xr midi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Nx 1.0 .
.Sh BUGS
With a SoundBlaster 16 card the device is full duplex, but it can
only sensibly handle a precision of 8 bits.
It does so by extending
the output 8 bit samples to 16 bits and using the 8 bit DMA channel
for input and the 16 bit channel for output.
.Pp
The non-SCSI CD-ROM interfaces found on some older cards are not supported.
