.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 1, 2003
.Dt SMAPI 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm smapi
.Nd "System Management Application Program Interface driver"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Many
.Tn IBM Thinkpad
laptops utilize a special software interface known as
.Tn SMAPI
(System Management Application Program Interface).
This interface controls various aspects of the system including:
.Bl -bullet
.It
System Interface
(the
.Tn BIOS
can store system information such as the system identifier),
.It
System Configuration (where devices such as the display can be configured),
.It
Power Management (software can interact with the
.Tn SMAPI BIOS
for Power Management control).
.El
.Pp
Client software must locate a
.Dq "header image"
stored in the
.Li F000
segment in the
.Tn Thinkpad ROM
(read-only memory), which resides at the 16-byte boundary.
This is considered the
.Dq "Entry Point"
for the service.
.Pp
The
.Dq "header image"
stores information like:
.Bl -bullet
.It
signature,
.It
.Tn SMAPI
version (major and minor),
.It
header image length,
.It
checksum information (which verifies the image),
.It
an Information Word (used to identify the
.Tn BIOS
service level),
.It
Real Mode Entry Point (where clients using the
Real/V86 mode for the far-call value),
.It
and finally a 16-bit/32-bit Protected Mode Entry
Point: base code address which specifies the
.Tn BIOS
physical address.
The client must prepare a 64 kilobyte selector for this
.Tn BIOS ) .
.El
.Pp
To invoke the
.Tn SMAPI BIOS ,
a far-call must be used on the entry point specified in the header file.
All other information should be stored in the client data area.
The client is required to prepare both an input and output parameter in a
data area of its own.
This area can be
.Dq informed
by pushing those pointers into its stack before the far-calls.
.Pp
The
.Tn SMAPI BIOS
uses the stack and data areas with the selector during a
.Tn BIOS
invocation, thus the caller must define the same privilege area as the
.Tn BIOS .
.Pp
The parameter structure will be made up by using the input and output
fields prepared by the caller.
The input field will specify the function request to the
.Tn BIOS .
The
.Tn BIOS
will then drop a return value into the output field.
These fields are made up of three parts.
The first holds parameters, function numbers, and return codes.
The next will contain an offset in hexadecimal.
Finally a length field which is comprised of Byte, Word, or Double Word.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Rs
.%B "IBM Thinkpad 560/560E Technical Reference"
.%O "06J0536 S76H-7587-01"
.Re
.Rs
.%B "IBM Thinkpad 560Z Technical Reference"
.%O "xxxxxxx xxxx-xxxx-xx"
.Re
.Rs
.%B "IBM Thinkpad 600 Technical Reference"
.%O "xxxxxxx xxxx-xxxx-xx"
.Re
.Rs
.%B "IBM Thinkpad 760XD/760XL/765D/765L Technical Reference"
.%O "06J0537 S30H-2433-02"
.Re
.Rs
.%B "IBM Thinkpad 770 Technical Reference"
.%O "05L1739 S05L-1739-00"
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Matthew N. Dodd Aq Mt mdodd@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Matthew N. Dodd Aq Mt mdodd@FreeBSD.org .
