.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Matthew N. Dodd <winter@jurai.net>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 31, 2004
.Dt VPD 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vpd
.Nd "Vital Product Data kernel interface"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device vpd"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Tn IBM ThinkPad
notebooks (and most
.Tn IBM
desktop PCs) have a 48-byte
Vital Product Data (VPD) structure located in the BIOS Shadow RAM.
.Pp
The VPD provides machine type and model information, the build ID
(this is roughly the BIOS version) and serial number information.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver scans the BIOS area and claims the memory used by the VPD
structure.
It provides the
.Xr sysctl 3
branch
.Va hw.vpd
to allow this information to be accessed by the userland.
The following variables are provided, one per VPD attachment (there should
only be one):
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv MACHINE_MODEL" -compact
.It Dv MACHINE_TYPE
.Pq Va machine.type
Machine type.
.It Dv MACHINE_MODEL
.Pq Va machine.model
Machine model.
.It Dv BUILD_ID
.Pq Va build.id
BIOS Build ID.
.It Dv SERIAL_BOX
.Pq Va serial.box
Box Serial Number.
.It Dv SERIAL_PLANAR
.Pq Va serial.planar
Motherboard Serial Number.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Rs
.%T "TP General - Using the BIOS Build ID to identify IBM ThinkPad systems"
.%N "Reference #: MIGR-45120"
.%D "November 22, 2002"
.%U "http://www.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?uid=psg1MIGR-45120"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Matthew N. Dodd Aq Mt mdodd@FreeBSD.org .
