Documentation/virt/kvm/x86/errata.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=======================================
Known limitations of CPU virtualization
=======================================

Whenever perfect emulation of a CPU feature is impossible or too hard, KVM
has to choose between not implementing the feature at all or introducing
behavioral differences between virtual machines and bare metal systems.

This file documents some of the known limitations that KVM has in
virtualizing CPU features.

x86
===

``KVM_GET_SUPPORTED_CPUID`` issues
----------------------------------

x87 features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unlike most other CPUID feature bits, CPUID[EAX=7,ECX=0]:EBX[6]
(FDP_EXCPTN_ONLY) and CPUID[EAX=7,ECX=0]:EBX]13] (ZERO_FCS_FDS) are
clear if the features are present and set if the features are not present.

Clearing these bits in CPUID has no effect on the operation of the guest;
if these bits are set on hardware, the features will not be present on
any virtual machine that runs on that hardware.

**Workaround:** It is recommended to always set these bits in guest CPUID.
Note however that any software (e.g ``WIN87EM.DLL``) expecting these features
to be present likely predates these CPUID feature bits, and therefore
doesn't know to check for them anyway.

Nested virtualization features
------------------------------

TBD

x2APIC
------
When KVM_X2APIC_API_USE_32BIT_IDS is enabled, KVM activates a hack/quirk that
allows sending events to a single vCPU using its x2APIC ID even if the target
vCPU has legacy xAPIC enabled, e.g. to bring up hotplugged vCPUs via INIT-SIPI
on VMs with > 255 vCPUs.  A side effect of the quirk is that, if multiple vCPUs
have the same physical APIC ID, KVM will deliver events targeting that APIC ID
only to the vCPU with the lowest vCPU ID.  If KVM_X2APIC_API_USE_32BIT_IDS is
not enabled, KVM follows x86 architecture when processing interrupts (all vCPUs
matching the target APIC ID receive the interrupt).

MTRRs
-----
KVM does not virtualization guest MTRR memory types.  KVM emulates accesses to
MTRR MSRs, i.e. {RD,WR}MSR in the guest will behave as expected, but KVM does
not honor guest MTRRs when determining the effective memory type, and instead
treats all of guest memory as having Writeback (WB) MTRRs.

Commit message:

KVM: VMX: Drop support for forcing UC memory when guest CR0.CD=1
Drop KVM's emulation of CR0.CD=1 on Intel CPUs now that KVM no longer
honors guest MTRR memtypes, as forcing UC memory for VMs with
non-coherent DMA only makes sense if the guest is using something other
than PAT to configure the memtype for the DMA region.

Furthermore, KVM has forced WB memory for CR0.CD=1 since commit
fb279950ba02 ("KVM: vmx: obey KVM_QUIRK_CD_NW_CLEARED"), and no known
VMM in existence disables KVM_X86_QUIRK_CD_NW_CLEARED, let alone does
so with non-coherent DMA.

Lastly, commit fb279950ba02 ("KVM: vmx: obey KVM_QUIRK_CD_NW_CLEARED") was
from the same author as commit b18d5431acc7 ("KVM: x86: fix CR0.CD
virtualization"), and followed by a mere month.  I.e. forcing UC memory
was likely the result of code inspection or perhaps misdiagnosed failures,
and not the necessitate by a concrete use case.

Update KVM's documentation to note that KVM_X86_QUIRK_CD_NW_CLEARED is now
AMD-only, and to take an erratum for lack of CR0.CD virtualization on
Intel.

Tested-by: Xiangfei Ma <xiangfeix.ma@intel.com>
Tested-by: Yongwei Ma <yongwei.ma@intel.com>
Link: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20240309010929.1403984-3-seanjc@google.com
Signed-off-by: Sean Christopherson <seanjc@google.com>

Documentation/virt/kvm/x86/errata.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=======================================
Known limitations of CPU virtualization
=======================================

Whenever perfect emulation of a CPU feature is impossible or too hard, KVM
has to choose between not implementing the feature at all or introducing
behavioral differences between virtual machines and bare metal systems.

This file documents some of the known limitations that KVM has in
virtualizing CPU features.

x86
===

``KVM_GET_SUPPORTED_CPUID`` issues
----------------------------------

x87 features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unlike most other CPUID feature bits, CPUID[EAX=7,ECX=0]:EBX[6]
(FDP_EXCPTN_ONLY) and CPUID[EAX=7,ECX=0]:EBX]13] (ZERO_FCS_FDS) are
clear if the features are present and set if the features are not present.

Clearing these bits in CPUID has no effect on the operation of the guest;
if these bits are set on hardware, the features will not be present on
any virtual machine that runs on that hardware.

**Workaround:** It is recommended to always set these bits in guest CPUID.
Note however that any software (e.g ``WIN87EM.DLL``) expecting these features
to be present likely predates these CPUID feature bits, and therefore
doesn't know to check for them anyway.

Nested virtualization features
------------------------------

TBD

x2APIC
------
When KVM_X2APIC_API_USE_32BIT_IDS is enabled, KVM activates a hack/quirk that
allows sending events to a single vCPU using its x2APIC ID even if the target
vCPU has legacy xAPIC enabled, e.g. to bring up hotplugged vCPUs via INIT-SIPI
on VMs with > 255 vCPUs.  A side effect of the quirk is that, if multiple vCPUs
have the same physical APIC ID, KVM will deliver events targeting that APIC ID
only to the vCPU with the lowest vCPU ID.  If KVM_X2APIC_API_USE_32BIT_IDS is
not enabled, KVM follows x86 architecture when processing interrupts (all vCPUs
matching the target APIC ID receive the interrupt).

MTRRs
-----
KVM does not virtualize guest MTRR memory types.  KVM emulates accesses to MTRR
MSRs, i.e. {RD,WR}MSR in the guest will behave as expected, but KVM does not
honor guest MTRRs when determining the effective memory type, and instead
treats all of guest memory as having Writeback (WB) MTRRs.

CR0.CD
------
KVM does not virtualize CR0.CD on Intel CPUs.  Similar to MTRR MSRs, KVM
emulates CR0.CD accesses so that loads and stores from/to CR0 behave as
expected, but setting CR0.CD=1 has no impact on the cachaeability of guest
memory.

Note, this erratum does not affect AMD CPUs, which fully virtualize CR0.CD in
hardware, i.e. put the CPU caches into "no fill" mode when CR0.CD=1, even when
running in the guest.
