Documentation/process/index.rst, before:

.. raw:: latex

	\renewcommand\thesection*
	\renewcommand\thesubsection*

.. _process_index:

=============================================
Working with the kernel development community
=============================================

So you want to be a Linux kernel developer?  Welcome!  While there is a lot
to be learned about the kernel in a technical sense, it is also important
to learn about how our community works.  Reading these documents will make
it much easier for you to get your changes merged with a minimum of
trouble.

An introduction to how kernel development works
-----------------------------------------------

Read these documents first: an understanding of the material here will ease
your entry into the kernel community.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   howto
   development-process
   submitting-patches
   submit-checklist

Tools and technical guides for kernel developers
------------------------------------------------

This is a collection of material that kernel developers should be familiar
with.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   changes
   programming-language
   coding-style
   maintainer-pgp-guide
   email-clients
   applying-patches
   backporting
   adding-syscalls
   volatile-considered-harmful
   botching-up-ioctls

Policy guides and developer statements
--------------------------------------

These are the rules that we try to live by in the kernel community (and
beyond).

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   license-rules
   code-of-conduct
   code-of-conduct-interpretation
   contribution-maturity-model
   kernel-enforcement-statement
   kernel-driver-statement
   stable-api-nonsense
   stable-kernel-rules
   management-style
   researcher-guidelines

Dealing with bugs
-----------------

Bugs are a fact of life; it is important that we handle them properly.
The documents below describe our policies around the handling of a couple
of special classes of bugs: regressions and security problems.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   handling-regressions
   security-bugs
   cve
   embargoed-hardware-issues

Maintainer information
----------------------

How to find the people who will accept your patches.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   maintainer-handbooks
   maintainers

Other material
--------------

Here are some other guides to the community that are of interest to most
developers:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   kernel-docs
   deprecated

.. only::  subproject and html

   Indices
   =======

   * :ref:`genindex`

Commit message:

docs: Add debugging section to process
This idea was formed after noticing that new developers experience
certain difficulty to navigate within the multitude of different
debugging options in the Kernel and while there often is good
documentation for the tools, the developer has to know first that they
exist and where to find them.
Add a general debugging section to the Kernel documentation, as an
easily locatable entry point to other documentation and as a general
guideline for the topic.

Signed-off-by: Sebastian Fricke <sebastian.fricke@collabora.com>
Reviewed-by: Randy Dunlap <rdunlap@infradead.org>
Signed-off-by: Jonathan Corbet <corbet@lwn.net>
Link: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20241028-media_docs_improve_v3-v3-1-edf5c5b3746f@collabora.com

Documentation/process/index.rst, after:

.. raw:: latex

	\renewcommand\thesection*
	\renewcommand\thesubsection*

.. _process_index:

=============================================
Working with the kernel development community
=============================================

So you want to be a Linux kernel developer?  Welcome!  While there is a lot
to be learned about the kernel in a technical sense, it is also important
to learn about how our community works.  Reading these documents will make
it much easier for you to get your changes merged with a minimum of
trouble.

An introduction to how kernel development works
-----------------------------------------------

Read these documents first: an understanding of the material here will ease
your entry into the kernel community.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   howto
   development-process
   submitting-patches
   submit-checklist

Tools and technical guides for kernel developers
------------------------------------------------

This is a collection of material that kernel developers should be familiar
with.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   changes
   programming-language
   coding-style
   maintainer-pgp-guide
   email-clients
   applying-patches
   backporting
   adding-syscalls
   volatile-considered-harmful
   botching-up-ioctls

Policy guides and developer statements
--------------------------------------

These are the rules that we try to live by in the kernel community (and
beyond).

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   license-rules
   code-of-conduct
   code-of-conduct-interpretation
   contribution-maturity-model
   kernel-enforcement-statement
   kernel-driver-statement
   stable-api-nonsense
   stable-kernel-rules
   management-style
   researcher-guidelines

Dealing with bugs
-----------------

Bugs are a fact of life; it is important that we handle them properly. The
documents below provide general advice about debugging and describe our
policies around the handling of a couple of special classes of bugs:
regressions and security problems.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   debugging/index
   handling-regressions
   security-bugs
   cve
   embargoed-hardware-issues

Maintainer information
----------------------

How to find the people who will accept your patches.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   maintainer-handbooks
   maintainers

Other material
--------------

Here are some other guides to the community that are of interest to most
developers:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   kernel-docs
   deprecated

.. only::  subproject and html

   Indices
   =======

   * :ref:`genindex`
