.TH USBIP "8" "February 2009" "usbip" "System Administration Utilities"
.SH NAME
usbip \- manage USB/IP devices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usbip
[\fIoptions\fR] <\fIcommand\fR> <\fIargs\fR>

.SH DESCRIPTION
On a USB/IP server, devices can be listed, bound, and unbound using
this program.  On a USB/IP client, devices exported by USB/IP servers
can be listed, attached and detached.

.SH OPTIONS
.HP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
.IP
Print debugging information.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-\-log\fR
.IP
Log to syslog.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-\-tcp-port PORT\fR
.IP
Connect to PORT on remote host (used for attach and list --remote).
.PP

.SH COMMANDS
.HP
\fBversion\fR
.IP
Show version and exit.
.PP

.HP
\fBhelp\fR [\fIcommand\fR]
.IP
Print the program help message, or help on a specific command, and
then exit.
.PP

.HP
\fBattach\fR \-\-remote=<\fIhost\fR> \-\-busid=<\fIbus_id\fR>
.IP
Attach a remote USB device.
.PP

.HP
\fBattach\fR \-\-remote=<\fIhost\fR> \-\-device=<\fIdev_id\fR>
.IP
Attach a remote USB gadget.
Only used when the remote usbipd is in device mode.
.PP

.HP
\fBdetach\fR \-\-port=<\fIport\fR>
.IP
Detach an imported USB device/gadget.
.PP

.HP
\fBbind\fR \-\-busid=<\fIbusid\fR>
.IP
Make a device exportable.
.PP

.HP
\fBunbind\fR \-\-busid=<\fIbusid\fR>
.IP
Stop exporting a device so it can be used by a local driver.
.PP

.HP
\fBlist\fR \-\-remote=<\fIhost\fR>
.IP
List USB devices exported by a remote host.
.PP

.HP
\fBlist\fR \-\-device
.IP
List USB gadgets of local usbip-vudc.
Only used when the local usbipd is in device mode.
Note that this can not list usbip-vudc USB gadgets of the remote device mode usbipd.
.PP

.HP
\fBlist\fR \-\-local
.IP
List local USB devices.
.PP

.HP
\fBport\fR
.IP
List imported devices/gadgets.
.PP


.SH EXAMPLES

    client:# usbip list --remote=server
        - List devices exported by remote server.

    client:# modprobe vhci-hcd

    client:# usbip attach --remote=server --busid=1-2
        - Connect the remote USB device.

    client:# usbip port
        - List imported devices/gadgets.

    client:# usbip detach --port=0
        - Detach the usb device.

The following example shows the usage of device mode

    server:# usbip list --device
        - List gadgets exported by local usbipd server.

    client:# modprobe vhci-hcd

    client:# usbip attach --remote=server --device=usbip-vudc.0
        - Connect the remote USB gadget.

    client:# usbip port
        - List imported devices/gadgets.

    client:# usbip detach --port=0
        - Detach the usb gadget.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBusbipd\fP\fB(8)\fB\fP
