.TH USBIP "8" "February 2009" "usbip" "System Administration Utilities"
.SH NAME
usbipd \- USB/IP server daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usbipd
[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B usbipd
provides USB/IP clients access to exported USB devices.

Devices have to explicitly be exported using
.B usbip bind
before usbipd makes them available to other hosts.

The daemon accepts connections from USB/IP clients
on TCP port 3240 by default.

.SH OPTIONS
.HP
\fB\-4\fR, \fB\-\-ipv4\fR
.IP
Bind to IPv4. Default is both.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-6\fR, \fB\-\-ipv6\fR
.IP
Bind to IPv6. Default is both.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-device\fR
.IP
Run in device mode. Rather than drive an attached device, create a virtual UDC to bind gadgets to.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
.IP
Run as a daemon process.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-debug\fR
.IP
Print debugging information.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-PFILE\fR, \fB\-\-pid FILE\fR
.IP
Write process id to FILE.
.br
If no FILE specified, use /var/run/usbipd.pid
.PP

\fB\-tPORT\fR, \fB\-\-tcp\-port PORT\fR
.IP
Listen on TCP/IP port PORT.
.PP

\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
.IP
Print the program help message and exit.
.PP

.HP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
.IP
Show version.
.PP

.SH LIMITATIONS

.B usbipd
offers no authentication or authorization for USB/IP. Any
USB/IP client can connect and use exported devices.

.SH EXAMPLES

    server:# modprobe usbip-host

    server:# usbipd -D
        - Start usbip daemon.

    server:# usbip list --local
        - List driver assignments for usb devices.

    server:# usbip bind --busid=1-2
        - Bind usbip-host.ko to the device of busid 1-2.
        - A usb device 1-2 is now exportable to other hosts!
        - Use 'usbip unbind --busid=1-2' when you want to shutdown exporting and use the device locally.

The following example shows the usage of device mode

    server:# modprobe usbip-vudc
        - Use /sys/class/udc/ interface.
        - usbip-host is independent of this module.

    server:# usbipd -e -D
        - Start usbip daemon in device mode.

    server:# modprobe g_mass_storage file=/tmp/tmp.img
        - Bind a gadget to usbip-vudc.
        - in this example, a mass storage gadget is bound.

    server:# usbip list --device
        - List gadgets exported by local usbipd server.

    server:# modprobe -r g_mass_storage
        - Unbind a gadget from usbip-vudc.
        - in this example, the previous mass storage gadget is unbound.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBusbip\fP\fB(8)\fB\fP

