Documentation/bpf/instruction-set.rst, before:

.. contents::
.. sectnum::

========================================
eBPF Instruction Set Specification, v1.0
========================================

This document specifies version 1.0 of the eBPF instruction set.


Registers and calling convention
================================

eBPF has 10 general purpose registers and a read-only frame pointer register,
all of which are 64-bits wide.

The eBPF calling convention is defined as:

* R0: return value from function calls, and exit value for eBPF programs
* R1 - R5: arguments for function calls
* R6 - R9: callee saved registers that function calls will preserve
* R10: read-only frame pointer to access stack

R0 - R5 are scratch registers and eBPF programs needs to spill/fill them if
necessary across calls.

Instruction encoding
====================

eBPF has two instruction encodings:

* the basic instruction encoding, which uses 64 bits to encode an instruction
* the wide instruction encoding, which appends a second 64-bit immediate (i.e.,
  constant) value after the basic instruction for a total of 128 bits.

The basic instruction encoding is as follows, where MSB and LSB mean the most significant
bits and least significant bits, respectively:

=============  =======  =======  =======  ============
32 bits (MSB)  16 bits  4 bits   4 bits   8 bits (LSB)
=============  =======  =======  =======  ============
imm            offset   src_reg  dst_reg  opcode
=============  =======  =======  =======  ============

**imm**
  signed integer immediate value

**offset**
  signed integer offset used with pointer arithmetic

**src_reg**
  the source register number (0-10), except where otherwise specified
  (`64-bit immediate instructions`_ reuse this field for other purposes)

**dst_reg**
  destination register number (0-10)

**opcode**
  operation to perform

Note that most instructions do not use all of the fields.
Unused fields shall be cleared to zero.

As discussed below in `64-bit immediate instructions`_, a 64-bit immediate
instruction uses a 64-bit immediate value that is constructed as follows.
The 64 bits following the basic instruction contain a pseudo instruction
using the same format but with opcode, dst_reg, src_reg, and offset all set to zero,
and imm containing the high 32 bits of the immediate value.

=================  ==================
64 bits (MSB)      64 bits (LSB)
=================  ==================
basic instruction  pseudo instruction
=================  ==================

Thus the 64-bit immediate value is constructed as follows:

  imm64 = (next_imm << 32) | imm

where 'next_imm' refers to the imm value of the pseudo instruction
following the basic instruction.

Instruction classes
-------------------

The three LSB bits of the 'opcode' field store the instruction class:

=========  =====  ===============================  ===================================
class      value  description                      reference
=========  =====  ===============================  ===================================
BPF_LD     0x00   non-standard load operations     `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_LDX    0x01   load into register operations    `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_ST     0x02   store from immediate operations  `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_STX    0x03   store from register operations   `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_ALU    0x04   32-bit arithmetic operations     `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
BPF_JMP    0x05   64-bit jump operations           `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
BPF_JMP32  0x06   32-bit jump operations           `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
BPF_ALU64  0x07   64-bit arithmetic operations     `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
=========  =====  ===============================  ===================================

Arithmetic and jump instructions
================================

For arithmetic and jump instructions (``BPF_ALU``, ``BPF_ALU64``, ``BPF_JMP`` and
``BPF_JMP32``), the 8-bit 'opcode' field is divided into three parts:

==============  ======  =================
4 bits (MSB)    1 bit   3 bits (LSB)
==============  ======  =================
code            source  instruction class
==============  ======  =================

**code**
  the operation code, whose meaning varies by instruction class

**source**
  the source operand location, which unless otherwise specified is one of:

  ======  =====  ==============================================
  source  value  description
  ======  =====  ==============================================
  BPF_K   0x00   use 32-bit 'imm' value as source operand
  BPF_X   0x08   use 'src_reg' register value as source operand
  ======  =====  ==============================================

**instruction class**
  the instruction class (see `Instruction classes`_)

Arithmetic instructions
-----------------------

``BPF_ALU`` uses 32-bit wide operands while ``BPF_ALU64`` uses 64-bit wide operands for
otherwise identical operations.
The 'code' field encodes the operation as below, where 'src' and 'dst' refer
to the values of the source and destination registers, respectively.

========  =====  ==========================================================
code      value  description
========  =====  ==========================================================
BPF_ADD   0x00   dst += src
BPF_SUB   0x10   dst -= src
BPF_MUL   0x20   dst \*= src
BPF_DIV   0x30   dst = (src != 0) ? (dst / src) : 0
BPF_OR    0x40   dst \|= src
BPF_AND   0x50   dst &= src
BPF_LSH   0x60   dst <<= src
BPF_RSH   0x70   dst >>= src
BPF_NEG   0x80   dst = ~src
BPF_MOD   0x90   dst = (src != 0) ? (dst % src) : dst
BPF_XOR   0xa0   dst ^= src
BPF_MOV   0xb0   dst = src
BPF_ARSH  0xc0   sign extending shift right
BPF_END   0xd0   byte swap operations (see `Byte swap instructions`_ below)
========  =====  ==========================================================

Underflow and overflow are allowed during arithmetic operations, meaning
the 64-bit or 32-bit value will wrap. If eBPF program execution would
result in division by zero, the destination register is instead set to zero.
If execution would result in modulo by zero, for ``BPF_ALU64`` the value of
the destination register is unchanged whereas for ``BPF_ALU`` the upper
32 bits of the destination register are zeroed.

``BPF_ADD | BPF_X | BPF_ALU`` means::

  dst = (u32) ((u32) dst + (u32) src)

``BPF_ADD | BPF_X | BPF_ALU64`` means::

  dst = dst + src

``BPF_XOR | BPF_K | BPF_ALU`` means::

  dst = (u32) dst ^ (u32) imm32

``BPF_XOR | BPF_K | BPF_ALU64`` means::

  dst = dst ^ imm32

Also note that the division and modulo operations are unsigned. Thus, for
``BPF_ALU``, 'imm' is first interpreted as an unsigned 32-bit value, whereas
for ``BPF_ALU64``, 'imm' is first sign extended to 64 bits and the result
interpreted as an unsigned 64-bit value. There are no instructions for
signed division or modulo.

Byte swap instructions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The byte swap instructions use an instruction class of ``BPF_ALU`` and a 4-bit
'code' field of ``BPF_END``.

The byte swap instructions operate on the destination register
only and do not use a separate source register or immediate value.

The 1-bit source operand field in the opcode is used to select what byte
order the operation convert from or to:

=========  =====  =================================================
source     value  description
=========  =====  =================================================
BPF_TO_LE  0x00   convert between host byte order and little endian
BPF_TO_BE  0x08   convert between host byte order and big endian
=========  =====  =================================================

The 'imm' field encodes the width of the swap operations.  The following widths
are supported: 16, 32 and 64.

Examples:

``BPF_ALU | BPF_TO_LE | BPF_END`` with imm = 16 means::

  dst = htole16(dst)

``BPF_ALU | BPF_TO_BE | BPF_END`` with imm = 64 means::

  dst = htobe64(dst)

Jump instructions
-----------------

``BPF_JMP32`` uses 32-bit wide operands while ``BPF_JMP`` uses 64-bit wide operands for
otherwise identical operations.
The 'code' field encodes the operation as below:

========  =====  =========================  ============
code      value  description                notes
========  =====  =========================  ============
BPF_JA    0x00   PC += off                  BPF_JMP only
BPF_JEQ   0x10   PC += off if dst == src
BPF_JGT   0x20   PC += off if dst > src     unsigned
BPF_JGE   0x30   PC += off if dst >= src    unsigned
BPF_JSET  0x40   PC += off if dst & src
BPF_JNE   0x50   PC += off if dst != src
BPF_JSGT  0x60   PC += off if dst > src     signed
BPF_JSGE  0x70   PC += off if dst >= src    signed
BPF_CALL  0x80   function call
BPF_EXIT  0x90   function / program return  BPF_JMP only
BPF_JLT   0xa0   PC += off if dst < src     unsigned
BPF_JLE   0xb0   PC += off if dst <= src    unsigned
BPF_JSLT  0xc0   PC += off if dst < src     signed
BPF_JSLE  0xd0   PC += off if dst <= src    signed
========  =====  =========================  ============

The eBPF program needs to store the return value into register R0 before doing a
BPF_EXIT.


Load and store instructions
===========================

For load and store instructions (``BPF_LD``, ``BPF_LDX``, ``BPF_ST``, and ``BPF_STX``), the
8-bit 'opcode' field is divided as:

============  ======  =================
3 bits (MSB)  2 bits  3 bits (LSB)
============  ======  =================
mode          size    instruction class
============  ======  =================

The mode modifier is one of:

  =============  =====  ====================================  =============
  mode modifier  value  description                           reference
  =============  =====  ====================================  =============
  BPF_IMM        0x00   64-bit immediate instructions         `64-bit immediate instructions`_
  BPF_ABS        0x20   legacy BPF packet access (absolute)   `Legacy BPF Packet access instructions`_
  BPF_IND        0x40   legacy BPF packet access (indirect)   `Legacy BPF Packet access instructions`_
  BPF_MEM        0x60   regular load and store operations     `Regular load and store operations`_
  BPF_ATOMIC     0xc0   atomic operations                     `Atomic operations`_
  =============  =====  ====================================  =============

The size modifier is one of:

  =============  =====  =====================
  size modifier  value  description
  =============  =====  =====================
  BPF_W          0x00   word        (4 bytes)
  BPF_H          0x08   half word   (2 bytes)
  BPF_B          0x10   byte
  BPF_DW         0x18   double word (8 bytes)
  =============  =====  =====================

Regular load and store operations
---------------------------------

The ``BPF_MEM`` mode modifier is used to encode regular load and store
instructions that transfer data between a register and memory.

``BPF_MEM | <size> | BPF_STX`` means::

  *(size *) (dst + offset) = src

``BPF_MEM | <size> | BPF_ST`` means::

  *(size *) (dst + offset) = imm32

``BPF_MEM | <size> | BPF_LDX`` means::

  dst = *(size *) (src + offset)

Where size is one of: ``BPF_B``, ``BPF_H``, ``BPF_W``, or ``BPF_DW``.

Atomic operations
-----------------

Atomic operations are operations that operate on memory and can not be
interrupted or corrupted by other access to the same memory region
by other eBPF programs or means outside of this specification.

All atomic operations supported by eBPF are encoded as store operations
that use the ``BPF_ATOMIC`` mode modifier as follows:

* ``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_W | BPF_STX`` for 32-bit operations
* ``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_DW | BPF_STX`` for 64-bit operations
* 8-bit and 16-bit wide atomic operations are not supported.

The 'imm' field is used to encode the actual atomic operation.
Simple atomic operation use a subset of the values defined to encode
arithmetic operations in the 'imm' field to encode the atomic operation:

========  =====  ===========
imm       value  description
========  =====  ===========
BPF_ADD   0x00   atomic add
BPF_OR    0x40   atomic or
BPF_AND   0x50   atomic and
BPF_XOR   0xa0   atomic xor
========  =====  ===========


``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_W  | BPF_STX`` with 'imm' = BPF_ADD means::

  *(u32 *)(dst + offset) += src

``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_DW | BPF_STX`` with 'imm' = BPF ADD means::

  *(u64 *)(dst + offset) += src

In addition to the simple atomic operations, there also is a modifier and
two complex atomic operations:

===========  ================  ===========================
imm          value             description
===========  ================  ===========================
BPF_FETCH    0x01              modifier: return old value
BPF_XCHG     0xe0 | BPF_FETCH  atomic exchange
BPF_CMPXCHG  0xf0 | BPF_FETCH  atomic compare and exchange
===========  ================  ===========================

The ``BPF_FETCH`` modifier is optional for simple atomic operations, and
always set for the complex atomic operations.  If the ``BPF_FETCH`` flag
is set, then the operation also overwrites ``src`` with the value that
was in memory before it was modified.

The ``BPF_XCHG`` operation atomically exchanges ``src`` with the value
addressed by ``dst + offset``.

The ``BPF_CMPXCHG`` operation atomically compares the value addressed by
``dst + offset`` with ``R0``. If they match, the value addressed by
``dst + offset`` is replaced with ``src``. In either case, the
value that was at ``dst + offset`` before the operation is zero-extended
and loaded back to ``R0``.

64-bit immediate instructions
-----------------------------

Instructions with the ``BPF_IMM`` 'mode' modifier use the wide instruction
encoding for an extra imm64 value.

There is currently only one such instruction.

``BPF_LD | BPF_DW | BPF_IMM`` means::

  dst = imm64


Legacy BPF Packet access instructions
-------------------------------------

eBPF previously introduced special instructions for access to packet data that were
carried over from classic BPF. However, these instructions are
deprecated and should no longer be used.

Commit message:

bpf, docs: Add note about type convention
Add explanation about use of "u64", "u32", etc. as
the type convention used in BPF documentation.

Signed-off-by: Dave Thaler <dthaler@microsoft.com>
Acked-by: David Vernet <void@manifault.com>
Link: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20230127014706.1005-1-dthaler1968@googlemail.com
Signed-off-by: Alexei Starovoitov <ast@kernel.org>

Documentation/bpf/instruction-set.rst, after:

.. contents::
.. sectnum::

========================================
eBPF Instruction Set Specification, v1.0
========================================

This document specifies version 1.0 of the eBPF instruction set.

Documentation conventions
=========================

For brevity, this document uses the type notion "u64", "u32", etc.
to mean an unsigned integer whose width is the specified number of bits.

Registers and calling convention
================================

eBPF has 10 general purpose registers and a read-only frame pointer register,
all of which are 64-bits wide.

The eBPF calling convention is defined as:

* R0: return value from function calls, and exit value for eBPF programs
* R1 - R5: arguments for function calls
* R6 - R9: callee saved registers that function calls will preserve
* R10: read-only frame pointer to access stack

R0 - R5 are scratch registers and eBPF programs needs to spill/fill them if
necessary across calls.

Instruction encoding
====================

eBPF has two instruction encodings:

* the basic instruction encoding, which uses 64 bits to encode an instruction
* the wide instruction encoding, which appends a second 64-bit immediate (i.e.,
  constant) value after the basic instruction for a total of 128 bits.

The basic instruction encoding is as follows, where MSB and LSB mean the most significant
bits and least significant bits, respectively:

=============  =======  =======  =======  ============
32 bits (MSB)  16 bits  4 bits   4 bits   8 bits (LSB)
=============  =======  =======  =======  ============
imm            offset   src_reg  dst_reg  opcode
=============  =======  =======  =======  ============

**imm**
  signed integer immediate value

**offset**
  signed integer offset used with pointer arithmetic

**src_reg**
  the source register number (0-10), except where otherwise specified
  (`64-bit immediate instructions`_ reuse this field for other purposes)

**dst_reg**
  destination register number (0-10)

**opcode**
  operation to perform

Note that most instructions do not use all of the fields.
Unused fields shall be cleared to zero.

As discussed below in `64-bit immediate instructions`_, a 64-bit immediate
instruction uses a 64-bit immediate value that is constructed as follows.
The 64 bits following the basic instruction contain a pseudo instruction
using the same format but with opcode, dst_reg, src_reg, and offset all set to zero,
and imm containing the high 32 bits of the immediate value.

=================  ==================
64 bits (MSB)      64 bits (LSB)
=================  ==================
basic instruction  pseudo instruction
=================  ==================

Thus the 64-bit immediate value is constructed as follows:

  imm64 = (next_imm << 32) | imm

where 'next_imm' refers to the imm value of the pseudo instruction
following the basic instruction.

Instruction classes
-------------------

The three LSB bits of the 'opcode' field store the instruction class:

=========  =====  ===============================  ===================================
class      value  description                      reference
=========  =====  ===============================  ===================================
BPF_LD     0x00   non-standard load operations     `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_LDX    0x01   load into register operations    `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_ST     0x02   store from immediate operations  `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_STX    0x03   store from register operations   `Load and store instructions`_
BPF_ALU    0x04   32-bit arithmetic operations     `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
BPF_JMP    0x05   64-bit jump operations           `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
BPF_JMP32  0x06   32-bit jump operations           `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
BPF_ALU64  0x07   64-bit arithmetic operations     `Arithmetic and jump instructions`_
=========  =====  ===============================  ===================================

Arithmetic and jump instructions
================================

For arithmetic and jump instructions (``BPF_ALU``, ``BPF_ALU64``, ``BPF_JMP`` and
``BPF_JMP32``), the 8-bit 'opcode' field is divided into three parts:

==============  ======  =================
4 bits (MSB)    1 bit   3 bits (LSB)
==============  ======  =================
code            source  instruction class
==============  ======  =================

**code**
  the operation code, whose meaning varies by instruction class

**source**
  the source operand location, which unless otherwise specified is one of:

  ======  =====  ==============================================
  source  value  description
  ======  =====  ==============================================
  BPF_K   0x00   use 32-bit 'imm' value as source operand
  BPF_X   0x08   use 'src_reg' register value as source operand
  ======  =====  ==============================================

**instruction class**
  the instruction class (see `Instruction classes`_)

Arithmetic instructions
-----------------------

``BPF_ALU`` uses 32-bit wide operands while ``BPF_ALU64`` uses 64-bit wide operands for
otherwise identical operations.
The 'code' field encodes the operation as below, where 'src' and 'dst' refer
to the values of the source and destination registers, respectively.

========  =====  ==========================================================
code      value  description
========  =====  ==========================================================
BPF_ADD   0x00   dst += src
BPF_SUB   0x10   dst -= src
BPF_MUL   0x20   dst \*= src
BPF_DIV   0x30   dst = (src != 0) ? (dst / src) : 0
BPF_OR    0x40   dst \|= src
BPF_AND   0x50   dst &= src
BPF_LSH   0x60   dst <<= src
BPF_RSH   0x70   dst >>= src
BPF_NEG   0x80   dst = ~src
BPF_MOD   0x90   dst = (src != 0) ? (dst % src) : dst
BPF_XOR   0xa0   dst ^= src
BPF_MOV   0xb0   dst = src
BPF_ARSH  0xc0   sign extending shift right
BPF_END   0xd0   byte swap operations (see `Byte swap instructions`_ below)
========  =====  ==========================================================

Underflow and overflow are allowed during arithmetic operations, meaning
the 64-bit or 32-bit value will wrap. If eBPF program execution would
result in division by zero, the destination register is instead set to zero.
If execution would result in modulo by zero, for ``BPF_ALU64`` the value of
the destination register is unchanged whereas for ``BPF_ALU`` the upper
32 bits of the destination register are zeroed.

``BPF_ADD | BPF_X | BPF_ALU`` means::

  dst = (u32) ((u32) dst + (u32) src)

where '(u32)' indicates that the upper 32 bits are zeroed.

``BPF_ADD | BPF_X | BPF_ALU64`` means::

  dst = dst + src

``BPF_XOR | BPF_K | BPF_ALU`` means::

  dst = (u32) dst ^ (u32) imm32

``BPF_XOR | BPF_K | BPF_ALU64`` means::

  dst = dst ^ imm32

Also note that the division and modulo operations are unsigned. Thus, for
``BPF_ALU``, 'imm' is first interpreted as an unsigned 32-bit value, whereas
for ``BPF_ALU64``, 'imm' is first sign extended to 64 bits and the result
interpreted as an unsigned 64-bit value. There are no instructions for
signed division or modulo.

Byte swap instructions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The byte swap instructions use an instruction class of ``BPF_ALU`` and a 4-bit
'code' field of ``BPF_END``.

The byte swap instructions operate on the destination register
only and do not use a separate source register or immediate value.

The 1-bit source operand field in the opcode is used to select what byte
order the operation convert from or to:

=========  =====  =================================================
source     value  description
=========  =====  =================================================
BPF_TO_LE  0x00   convert between host byte order and little endian
BPF_TO_BE  0x08   convert between host byte order and big endian
=========  =====  =================================================

The 'imm' field encodes the width of the swap operations.  The following widths
are supported: 16, 32 and 64.

Examples:

``BPF_ALU | BPF_TO_LE | BPF_END`` with imm = 16 means::

  dst = htole16(dst)

``BPF_ALU | BPF_TO_BE | BPF_END`` with imm = 64 means::

  dst = htobe64(dst)

Jump instructions
-----------------

``BPF_JMP32`` uses 32-bit wide operands while ``BPF_JMP`` uses 64-bit wide operands for
otherwise identical operations.
The 'code' field encodes the operation as below:

========  =====  =========================  ============
code      value  description                notes
========  =====  =========================  ============
BPF_JA    0x00   PC += off                  BPF_JMP only
BPF_JEQ   0x10   PC += off if dst == src
BPF_JGT   0x20   PC += off if dst > src     unsigned
BPF_JGE   0x30   PC += off if dst >= src    unsigned
BPF_JSET  0x40   PC += off if dst & src
BPF_JNE   0x50   PC += off if dst != src
BPF_JSGT  0x60   PC += off if dst > src     signed
BPF_JSGE  0x70   PC += off if dst >= src    signed
BPF_CALL  0x80   function call
BPF_EXIT  0x90   function / program return  BPF_JMP only
BPF_JLT   0xa0   PC += off if dst < src     unsigned
BPF_JLE   0xb0   PC += off if dst <= src    unsigned
BPF_JSLT  0xc0   PC += off if dst < src     signed
BPF_JSLE  0xd0   PC += off if dst <= src    signed
========  =====  =========================  ============

The eBPF program needs to store the return value into register R0 before doing a
BPF_EXIT.


Load and store instructions
===========================

For load and store instructions (``BPF_LD``, ``BPF_LDX``, ``BPF_ST``, and ``BPF_STX``), the
8-bit 'opcode' field is divided as:

============  ======  =================
3 bits (MSB)  2 bits  3 bits (LSB)
============  ======  =================
mode          size    instruction class
============  ======  =================

The mode modifier is one of:

  =============  =====  ====================================  =============
  mode modifier  value  description                           reference
  =============  =====  ====================================  =============
  BPF_IMM        0x00   64-bit immediate instructions         `64-bit immediate instructions`_
  BPF_ABS        0x20   legacy BPF packet access (absolute)   `Legacy BPF Packet access instructions`_
  BPF_IND        0x40   legacy BPF packet access (indirect)   `Legacy BPF Packet access instructions`_
  BPF_MEM        0x60   regular load and store operations     `Regular load and store operations`_
  BPF_ATOMIC     0xc0   atomic operations                     `Atomic operations`_
  =============  =====  ====================================  =============

The size modifier is one of:

  =============  =====  =====================
  size modifier  value  description
  =============  =====  =====================
  BPF_W          0x00   word        (4 bytes)
  BPF_H          0x08   half word   (2 bytes)
  BPF_B          0x10   byte
  BPF_DW         0x18   double word (8 bytes)
  =============  =====  =====================

Regular load and store operations
---------------------------------

The ``BPF_MEM`` mode modifier is used to encode regular load and store
instructions that transfer data between a register and memory.

``BPF_MEM | <size> | BPF_STX`` means::

  *(size *) (dst + offset) = src

``BPF_MEM | <size> | BPF_ST`` means::

  *(size *) (dst + offset) = imm32

``BPF_MEM | <size> | BPF_LDX`` means::

  dst = *(size *) (src + offset)

Where size is one of: ``BPF_B``, ``BPF_H``, ``BPF_W``, or ``BPF_DW``.

Atomic operations
-----------------

Atomic operations are operations that operate on memory and can not be
interrupted or corrupted by other access to the same memory region
by other eBPF programs or means outside of this specification.

All atomic operations supported by eBPF are encoded as store operations
that use the ``BPF_ATOMIC`` mode modifier as follows:

* ``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_W | BPF_STX`` for 32-bit operations
* ``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_DW | BPF_STX`` for 64-bit operations
* 8-bit and 16-bit wide atomic operations are not supported.

The 'imm' field is used to encode the actual atomic operation.
Simple atomic operation use a subset of the values defined to encode
arithmetic operations in the 'imm' field to encode the atomic operation:

========  =====  ===========
imm       value  description
========  =====  ===========
BPF_ADD   0x00   atomic add
BPF_OR    0x40   atomic or
BPF_AND   0x50   atomic and
BPF_XOR   0xa0   atomic xor
========  =====  ===========


``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_W  | BPF_STX`` with 'imm' = BPF_ADD means::

  *(u32 *)(dst + offset) += src

``BPF_ATOMIC | BPF_DW | BPF_STX`` with 'imm' = BPF ADD means::

  *(u64 *)(dst + offset) += src

In addition to the simple atomic operations, there also is a modifier and
two complex atomic operations:

===========  ================  ===========================
imm          value             description
===========  ================  ===========================
BPF_FETCH    0x01              modifier: return old value
BPF_XCHG     0xe0 | BPF_FETCH  atomic exchange
BPF_CMPXCHG  0xf0 | BPF_FETCH  atomic compare and exchange
===========  ================  ===========================

The ``BPF_FETCH`` modifier is optional for simple atomic operations, and
always set for the complex atomic operations.  If the ``BPF_FETCH`` flag
is set, then the operation also overwrites ``src`` with the value that
was in memory before it was modified.

The ``BPF_XCHG`` operation atomically exchanges ``src`` with the value
addressed by ``dst + offset``.

The ``BPF_CMPXCHG`` operation atomically compares the value addressed by
``dst + offset`` with ``R0``. If they match, the value addressed by
``dst + offset`` is replaced with ``src``. In either case, the
value that was at ``dst + offset`` before the operation is zero-extended
and loaded back to ``R0``.

64-bit immediate instructions
-----------------------------

Instructions with the ``BPF_IMM`` 'mode' modifier use the wide instruction
encoding for an extra imm64 value.

There is currently only one such instruction.

``BPF_LD | BPF_DW | BPF_IMM`` means::

  dst = imm64


Legacy BPF Packet access instructions
-------------------------------------

eBPF previously introduced special instructions for access to packet data that were
carried over from classic BPF. However, these instructions are
deprecated and should no longer be used.
