.\" $OpenBSD: OPENSSL_init_ssl.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt OPENSSL_INIT_SSL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm OPENSSL_init_ssl
.Nd initialise the crypto and ssl libraries
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft int
.Fo OPENSSL_init_ssl
.Fa "uint64_t options"
.Fa "const void *dummy"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This function is deprecated.
It is never useful for any application program to call it explicitly.
The library automatically calls it internally with an
.Fa options
argument of 0 whenever needed.
It is safest to assume that any function may do so.
.Pp
To enable or disable the standard configuration file, instead use
.Xr OPENSSL_config 3
or
.Xr OPENSSL_no_config 3 ,
respectively.
To load a non-standard configuration file, refer to
.Xr CONF_modules_load_file 3 .
.Pp
.Fn OPENSSL_init_ssl
calls
.Xr OPENSSL_init_crypto 3 ,
.Xr SSL_load_error_strings 3 ,
and
.Xr SSL_library_init 3 .
.Pp
The
.Fa options
argument is passed on to
.Xr OPENSSL_init_crypto 3
and the
.Fa dummy
argument is ignored.
.Pp
If this function is called more than once,
none of the calls except the first one have any effect.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn OPENSSL_init_ssl
is intended to return 1 on success or 0 on error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CONF_modules_load_file 3 ,
.Xr OPENSSL_config 3 ,
.Xr ssl 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn OPENSSL_init_ssl
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
.Sh BUGS
.Fn OPENSSL_init_ssl
silently ignores even more configuration failures than
.Xr OPENSSL_init_crypto 3 .
