.\" $OpenBSD: ssl.3,v 1.26 2024/08/31 10:51:48 tb Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL e330f55d Nov 11 00:51:04 2016 +0100
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL 322755cc Sep 1 08:40:51 2018 +0800
.\"
.\" This file was written by Ralf S. Engelschall <rse@openssl.org>,
.\" Ben Laurie <ben@openssl.org>, and Ulf Moeller <ulf@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2002, 2005, 2013, 2015 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 31 2024 $
.Dt SSL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ssl
.Nd OpenSSL TLS library
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ssl
library implements the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol,
the successor to the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol.
.Pp
An
.Vt SSL_CTX
object is created as a framework to establish TLS/SSL enabled connections (see
.Xr SSL_CTX_new 3 ) .
Various options regarding certificates, algorithms, etc., can be set in this
object.
.Pp
When a network connection has been created, it can be assigned to an
.Vt SSL
object.
After the
.Vt SSL
object has been created using
.Xr SSL_new 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_fd 3
or
.Xr SSL_set_bio 3
can be used to associate the network connection with the object.
.Pp
Then the TLS/SSL handshake is performed using
.Xr SSL_accept 3
or
.Xr SSL_connect 3
respectively.
.Xr SSL_read 3
and
.Xr SSL_write 3
are used to read and write data on the TLS/SSL connection.
.Xr SSL_shutdown 3
can be used to shut down the TLS/SSL connection.
.Sh DATA STRUCTURES
Currently the
.Nm ssl
library functions deal with the following data structures:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Vt SSL_METHOD No (SSL Method)
That's a dispatch structure describing the internal
.Nm ssl
library methods/functions which implement the various protocol versions.
It's needed to create an
.Vt SSL_CTX .
See
.Xr TLS_method 3
for constructors.
.It Vt SSL_CIPHER No (SSL Cipher)
This structure holds the algorithm information for a particular cipher which
is a core part of the SSL/TLS protocol.
The available ciphers are configured on an
.Vt SSL_CTX
basis and the actually used ones are then part of the
.Vt SSL_SESSION .
.It Vt SSL_CTX No (SSL Context)
That's the global context structure which is created by a server or client
once per program lifetime and which holds mainly default values for the
.Vt SSL
structures which are later created for the connections.
.It Vt SSL_SESSION No (SSL Session)
This is a structure containing the current TLS/SSL session details for a
connection:
.Vt SSL_CIPHER Ns s ,
client and server certificates, keys, etc.
.It Vt SSL No (SSL Connection)
That's the main SSL/TLS structure which is created by a server or client per
established connection.
This actually is the core structure in the SSL API.
At run-time the application usually deals with this structure which has
links to mostly all other structures.
.El
.Sh HEADER FILES
Currently the
.Nm ssl
library provides the following C header files containing the prototypes for the
data structures and functions:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ssl.h
That's the common header file for the SSL/TLS API.
Include it into your program to make the API of the
.Nm ssl
library available.
It internally includes both more private SSL headers and headers from the
.Em crypto
library.
Whenever you need hardcore details on the internals of the SSL API, look inside
this header file.
.It Pa ssl3.h
That's the sub header file dealing with the SSLv3 protocol only.
.Bf Em
Usually you don't have to include it explicitly because it's already included
by
.Pa ssl.h .
.Ef
.It Pa tls1.h
That's the sub header file dealing with the TLSv1 protocol only.
.Bf Em
Usually you don't have to include it explicitly because it's already included
by
.Pa ssl.h .
.Ef
.El
.Sh API FUNCTIONS
.Ss Ciphers
The following pages describe functions acting on
.Vt SSL_CIPHER
objects:
.Xr SSL_get_ciphers 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_current_cipher 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CIPHER_get_name 3
.Ss Protocol contexts
The following pages describe functions acting on
.Vt SSL_CTX
objects.
.Pp
Constructors and destructors:
.Xr SSL_CTX_new 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_ssl_version 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_free 3
.Pp
Certificate configuration:
.Xr SSL_CTX_add_extra_chain_cert 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_get0_certificate 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_cert_store 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_cert_verify_callback 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_client_cert_cb 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_default_passwd_cb 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_status_cb 3
.Pp
Session configuration:
.Xr SSL_CTX_add_session 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_flush_sessions 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_number 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_get_cb 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sessions 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_cache_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_timeout 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_ticket_key_cb 3
.Pp
Various configuration:
.Xr SSL_CTX_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_servername_callback 3
.Ss Common configuration of contexts and connections
The functions on the following pages each come in two variants:
one to directly configure a single
.Vt SSL
connection and another to be called on an
.Vt SSL_CTX
object, to set up defaults for all future
.Vt SSL
connections created from that context.
.Pp
Protocol and algorithm configuration:
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_alpn_select_cb 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_cipher_list 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_min_proto_version 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_options 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_security_level 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_use_srtp 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tmp_dh_callback 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set1_groups 3
.Pp
Certificate configuration:
.Xr SSL_CTX_add1_chain_cert 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_get_verify_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_client_CA_list 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_max_cert_list 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_verify 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_use_certificate 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_client_CA_list 3
.Xr SSL_set1_param 3
.Pp
Session configuration:
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_generate_session_id 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_id_context 3
.Pp
Various configuration:
.Xr SSL_CTX_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_info_callback 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_msg_callback 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_read_ahead 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_max_send_fragment 3
.Ss Sessions
The following pages describe functions acting on
.Vt SSL_SESSION
objects.
.Pp
Constructors and destructors:
.Xr SSL_SESSION_new 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_free 3
.Pp
Accessors:
.Xr SSL_SESSION_get_compress_id 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_get_id 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_get_protocol_version 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_get_time 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_get0_peer 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_has_ticket 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_set1_id_context 3
.Pp
Encoding and decoding:
.Xr d2i_SSL_SESSION 3 ,
.Xr PEM_read_SSL_SESSION 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_print 3
.Ss Connections
The following pages describe functions acting on
.Vt SSL
connection objects:
.Pp
Constructors and destructors:
.Xr SSL_new 3 ,
.Xr SSL_dup 3 ,
.Xr SSL_free 3 ,
.Xr BIO_f_ssl 3
.Pp
To change the configuration:
.Xr SSL_clear 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_SSL_CTX 3 ,
.Xr SSL_copy_session_id 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_bio 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_connect_state 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_fd 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_session 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set1_host 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_verify_result 3
.Pp
To inspect the configuration:
.Xr SSL_get_certificate 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_default_timeout 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_fd 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_rbio 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_SSL_CTX 3
.Pp
To transmit data:
.Xr DTLSv1_listen 3 ,
.Xr SSL_accept 3 ,
.Xr SSL_connect 3 ,
.Xr SSL_do_handshake 3 ,
.Xr SSL_read 3 ,
.Xr SSL_read_early_data 3 ,
.Xr SSL_renegotiate 3 ,
.Xr SSL_shutdown 3 ,
.Xr SSL_write 3
.Pp
To inspect the state after a connection is established:
.Xr SSL_export_keying_material 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_client_random 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_ex_data_X509_STORE_CTX_idx 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_peer_cert_chain 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_peer_certificate 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_server_tmp_key 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_servername 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_session 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_shared_ciphers 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_verify_result 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_version 3 ,
.Xr SSL_session_reused 3
.Pp
To inspect the state during ongoing communication:
.Xr SSL_get_error 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_shutdown 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_state 3 ,
.Xr SSL_num_renegotiations 3 ,
.Xr SSL_pending 3 ,
.Xr SSL_rstate_string 3 ,
.Xr SSL_state_string 3 ,
.Xr SSL_want 3
.Ss Utility functions
.Xr SSL_alert_type_string 3 ,
.Xr SSL_dup_CA_list 3 ,
.Xr SSL_load_client_CA_file 3
.Ss Obsolete functions
.Xr OPENSSL_init_ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_COMP_get_compression_methods 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tmp_rsa_callback 3 ,
.Xr SSL_library_init 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_tmp_ecdh 3
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openssl 1 ,
.Xr crypto 3 ,
.Xr tls_init 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
document appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.2.
