.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2002, 2014 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_SESS_SET_CACHE_SIZE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_get_cache_size
.Nd manipulate session cache size
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size "SSL_CTX *ctx" "long t"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_get_cache_size "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size
sets the size of the internal session cache of context
.Fa ctx
to
.Fa t .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_get_cache_size
returns the currently valid session cache size.
.Pp
The internal session cache size is
.Dv SSL_SESSION_CACHE_MAX_SIZE_DEFAULT ,
currently 1024\(mu20, so that up to 20000 sessions can be held.
This size can be modified using the
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size
call.
A special case is the size 0, which is used for unlimited size.
.Pp
If adding the session makes the cache exceed its size, then unused
sessions are dropped from the end of the cache.
Cache space may also be reclaimed by calling
.Xr SSL_CTX_flush_sessions 3
to remove expired sessions.
.Pp
If the size of the session cache is reduced and more sessions are already in
the session cache,
old session will be removed the next time a session shall be added.
This removal is not synchronized with the expiration of sessions.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size
returns the previously valid size.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_get_cache_size
returns the currently valid size.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_flush_sessions 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_number 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_cache_mode 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_get_cache_size
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
