.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_ctrl.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_CTRL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_ctrl ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_callback_ctrl ,
.Nm SSL_ctrl ,
.Nm SSL_callback_ctrl
.Nd internal handling functions for SSL_CTX and SSL objects
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_ctrl "SSL_CTX *ctx" "int cmd" "long larg" "void *parg"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_callback_ctrl "SSL_CTX *" "int cmd" "void (*fp)()"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_ctrl "SSL *ssl" "int cmd" "long larg" "void *parg"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_callback_ctrl "SSL *" "int cmd" "void (*fp)()"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn SSL_*_ctrl
family of functions is used to manipulate settings of
the
.Vt SSL_CTX
and
.Vt SSL
objects.
Depending on the command
.Fa cmd
the arguments
.Fa larg ,
.Fa parg ,
or
.Fa fp
are evaluated.
These functions should never be called directly.
All functionalities needed are made available via other functions or macros.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The return values of the
.Fn SSL*_ctrl
functions depend on the command supplied via the
.Fn cmd
parameter.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_add_extra_chain_cert 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_number 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_max_cert_list 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_options 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_cache_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_servername_callback 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_status_cb 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_tlsext_ticket_key_cb 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_server_tmp_key 3 ,
.Xr SSL_num_renegotiations 3 ,
.Xr SSL_session_reused 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_max_send_fragment 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_ctrl
and
.Fn SSL_ctrl
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_callback_ctrl
and
.Fn SSL_callback_ctrl
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.5 and have been available since
.Ox 2.7 .
