.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_SESSION_get_time.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2005, 2006, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_SESSION_GET_TIME 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_SESSION_get_time ,
.Nm SSL_SESSION_set_time ,
.Nm SSL_SESSION_get_timeout ,
.Nm SSL_SESSION_set_timeout ,
.Nm SSL_get_time ,
.Nm SSL_set_time ,
.Nm SSL_get_timeout ,
.Nm SSL_set_timeout
.Nd retrieve and manipulate session time and timeout settings
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_time "const SSL_SESSION *s"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_time "SSL_SESSION *s" "long tm"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_timeout "const SSL_SESSION *s"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_timeout "SSL_SESSION *s" "long tm"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_get_time "const SSL_SESSION *s"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_set_time "SSL_SESSION *s" "long tm"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_get_timeout "const SSL_SESSION *s"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_set_timeout "SSL_SESSION *s" "long tm"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_time
returns the time at which the session
.Fa s
was established.
The time is given in seconds since the Epoch and therefore compatible to the
time delivered by the
.Xr time 3
call.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_time
replaces the creation time of the session
.Fa s
with
the chosen value
.Fa tm .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_timeout
returns the timeout value set for session
.Fa s
in seconds.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_timeout
sets the timeout value for session
.Fa s
in seconds to
.Fa tm .
.Pp
The
.Fn SSL_get_time ,
.Fn SSL_set_time ,
.Fn SSL_get_timeout ,
and
.Fn SSL_set_timeout
functions are synonyms for the
.Fn SSL_SESSION_*
counterparts.
.Pp
Sessions are expired by examining the creation time and the timeout value.
Both are set at creation time of the session to the actual time and the default
timeout value at creation, respectively, as set by
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_timeout 3 .
Using these functions it is possible to extend or shorten the lifetime of the
session.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_time
and
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_timeout
return the currently valid values.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_time
and
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_timeout
return 1 on success.
.Pp
If any of the function is passed the
.Dv NULL
pointer for the session
.Fa s ,
0 is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_timeout 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_default_timeout 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_session 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_has_ticket 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_get_time ,
.Fn SSL_get_timeout ,
and
.Fn SSL_set_timeout
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier.
.Fn SSL_set_time
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.2.
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_time ,
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_time ,
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get_timeout ,
and
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set_timeout
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0.
All these functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
