.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_get_ex_new_index.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 9b86974e Aug 17 15:21:33 2015 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2005 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_GET_EX_NEW_INDEX 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_get_ex_new_index ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_set_ex_data ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_get_ex_data
.Nd internal application specific data functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_get_ex_new_index
.Fa "long argl"
.Fa "void *argp"
.Fa "CRYPTO_EX_new *new_func"
.Fa "CRYPTO_EX_dup *dup_func"
.Fa "CRYPTO_EX_free *free_func"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_ex_data "SSL_CTX *ctx" "int idx" "void *arg"
.Ft void *
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_ex_data "const SSL_CTX *ctx" "int idx"
.Bd -literal
 typedef int new_func(void *parent, void *ptr, CRYPTO_EX_DATA *ad,
                int idx, long argl, void *argp);
 typedef void free_func(void *parent, void *ptr, CRYPTO_EX_DATA *ad,
                int idx, long argl, void *argp);
 typedef int dup_func(CRYPTO_EX_DATA *to, CRYPTO_EX_DATA *from, void *from_d,
                int idx, long argl, void *argp);
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Several OpenSSL structures can have application specific data attached to them.
These functions are used internally by OpenSSL to manipulate application
specific data attached to a specific structure.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_ex_new_index
is used to register a new index for application specific data.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_ex_data
is used to store application data at
.Fa arg
for
.Fa idx
into the
.Fa ctx
object.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_ex_data
is used to retrieve the information for
.Fa idx
from
.Fa ctx .
.Pp
A detailed description for the
.Fn *_get_ex_new_index
functionality can be found in
.Xr RSA_get_ex_new_index 3 .
The
.Fn *_get_ex_data
and
.Fn *_set_ex_data
functionality is described in
.Xr CRYPTO_set_ex_data 3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr CRYPTO_set_ex_data 3 ,
.Xr RSA_get_ex_new_index 3 ,
.Xr ssl 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_ex_new_index ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_ex_data ,
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_ex_data
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
