.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_get_current_cipher.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2005, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_GET_CURRENT_CIPHER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_get_current_cipher ,
.Nm SSL_get_cipher ,
.Nm SSL_get_cipher_name ,
.Nm SSL_get_cipher_bits ,
.Nm SSL_get_cipher_version
.Nd get SSL_CIPHER of a connection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft const SSL_CIPHER *
.Fn SSL_get_current_cipher "const SSL *ssl"
.Ft const char *
.Fn SSL_get_cipher "const SSL *ssl"
.Ft const char *
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_name "const SSL *ssl"
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_bits "const SSL *ssl" "int *np"
.Ft char *
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_version "const SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_get_current_cipher
returns a pointer to an
.Vt SSL_CIPHER
object containing the description of the actually used cipher of a connection
established with the
.Fa ssl
object.
See
.Xr SSL_CIPHER_get_name 3
for more details.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_name
obtains the name of the currently used cipher.
.Fn SSL_get_cipher
is identical to
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_name .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_bits
obtains the number of secret/algorithm bits used and
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_version
returns the protocol name.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_cipher ,
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_name ,
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_bits ,
and
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_version
are implemented as macros.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_get_current_cipher
returns the cipher actually used, or
.Dv NULL
if no session has been established.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CIPHER_get_name 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_get_cipher
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier.
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_bits
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.4.
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_name
and
.Fn SSL_get_cipher_version
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0.
.Fn SSL_get_current_cipher
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.1.
These functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
