.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_get_peer_cert_chain.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL SSL_get_peer_cert_chain.pod 1f164c6f Jan 18 01:40:36 2017 +0100
.\"	OpenSSL SSL_get_peer_cert_chain.pod 9b86974e Aug 17 15:21:33 2015 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2005, 2014, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_GET_PEER_CERT_CHAIN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_get_peer_cert_chain
.Nd get the X509 certificate chain sent by the peer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft STACK_OF(X509) *
.Fn SSL_get_peer_cert_chain "const SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_get_peer_cert_chain
returns a pointer to
.Dv STACK_OF Ns Po Vt X509 Pc
certificates forming the certificate chain of the peer.
If called on the client side, the stack also contains the peer's certificate;
if called on the server side, the peer's certificate must be obtained
separately using
.Xr SSL_get_peer_certificate 3 .
If the peer did not present a certificate,
.Dv NULL
is returned.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_peer_cert_chain
returns the peer chain as sent by the peer: it only consists of
certificates the peer has sent (in the order the peer has sent them)
and it is not a verified chain.
.Pp
If the session is resumed, peers do not send certificates, so a
.Dv NULL
pointer is returned.
Applications can call
.Fn SSL_session_reused
to determine whether a session is resumed.
.Pp
The reference count of the
.Dv STACK_OF Ns Po Vt X509 Pc
object is not incremented.
If the corresponding session is freed, the pointer must not be used any longer.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The following return values can occur:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv NULL
No certificate was presented by the peer or no connection was established or
the certificate chain is no longer available when a session is reused.
.It Pointer to a Dv STACK_OF Ns Po X509 Pc
The return value points to the certificate chain presented by the peer.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_peer_certificate 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_get_peer_cert_chain
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
