.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_flush_sessions.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL SSL_CTX_flush_sessions.pod 1722496f Jun 8 15:18:38 2017 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_FLUSH_SESSIONS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_flush_sessions
.Nd remove expired sessions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft void
.Fn SSL_CTX_flush_sessions "SSL_CTX *ctx" "long tm"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_flush_sessions
causes a run through the session cache of
.Fa ctx
to remove sessions expired at time
.Fa tm .
.Pp
If enabled, the internal session cache will collect all sessions established
up to the specified maximum number (see
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size 3 ) .
As sessions will not be reused once they are expired, they should be
removed from the cache to save resources.
This can either be done automatically whenever 255 new sessions were
established (see
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_cache_mode 3 )
or manually by calling
.Fn SSL_CTX_flush_sessions .
.Pp
The parameter
.Fa tm
specifies the time which should be used for the
expiration test, in most cases the actual time given by
.Fn time 0
will be used.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_flush_sessions
will only check sessions stored in the internal cache.
When a session is found and removed, the
.Va remove_session_cb
is however called to synchronize with the external cache (see
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_get_cb 3 ) .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_get_cb 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_cache_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_timeout 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_flush_sessions
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
