.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_new.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 1c7ae3dd Mar 29 19:17:55 2017 +1000
.\"
.\" This file was written by Richard Levitte <levitte@openssl.org>
.\" and Matt Caswell <matt@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_new ,
.Nm SSL_up_ref
.Nd create a new SSL structure for a connection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft SSL *
.Fn SSL_new "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_up_ref "SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_new
creates a new
.Vt SSL
structure which is needed to hold the data for a TLS/SSL connection.
The new structure inherits the settings of the underlying context
.Fa ctx :
connection method, options, verification settings,
timeout settings, security level.
The reference count of the new structure is set to 1.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_up_ref
increments the reference count of
.Fa ssl
by 1.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The following return values can occur:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv NULL
The creation of a new
.Vt SSL
structure failed.
Check the error stack to find out the reason.
.It Pointer to an Vt SSL No structure
The return value points to an allocated
.Vt SSL
structure.
.El
.Pp
.Fn SSL_up_ref
returns 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_clear 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_options 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_security_level 3 ,
.Xr SSL_free 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_SSL_CTX 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_new
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_up_ref
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
