.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher.3,v 1.2 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL d42e7759f Mar 30 19:40:04 2017 +0200
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL df75c2bf Dec 9 01:02:36 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Rich Salz <rsalz@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2016, 2017 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_SESSION_GET0_CIPHER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher
.Nd retrieve the SSL cipher associated with a session
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft const SSL_CIPHER *
.Fo SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher
.Fa "const SSL_SESSION *session"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher
retrieves the cipher that was used by the connection when the session
was created, or
.Dv NULL
if it cannot be determined.
.Pp
The value returned is a pointer to an object maintained within
.Fa session
and should not be released.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher
returns the
.Vt SSL_CIPHER
associated with
.Fa session
or
.Dv NULL
if it cannot be determined.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CIPHER_get_name 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_current_cipher 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_session 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get0_cipher
function first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0
and has been available since
.Ox 7.0 .
