.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_get_verify_result.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2001, 2005 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_GET_VERIFY_RESULT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_get_verify_result
.Nd get result of peer certificate verification
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_get_verify_result "const SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_get_verify_result
returns the result of the verification of the X509 certificate presented by the
peer, if any.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_verify_result
can only return one error code while the verification of a certificate can fail
because of many reasons at the same time.
Only the last verification error that occurred during the processing is
available from
.Fn SSL_get_verify_result .
.Pp
The verification result is part of the established session and is restored when
a session is reused.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The following return values can currently occur:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv X509_V_OK
The verification succeeded or no peer certificate was presented.
.It Any other value
Documented in
.Xr openssl 1 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openssl 1 ,
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_verify 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get0_peername 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_peer_certificate 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_verify_result 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_get_verify_result
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.1 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Sh BUGS
If no peer certificate was presented, the returned result code is
.Dv X509_V_OK .
This is because no verification error occurred;
however, it does not indicate success.
.Fn SSL_get_verify_result
is only useful in connection with
.Xr SSL_get_peer_certificate 3 .
