.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_free.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2001, 2003 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_FREE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_free
.Nd free an allocated SSL_CTX object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft void
.Fn SSL_CTX_free "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_free
decrements the reference count of
.Fa ctx ,
and removes the
.Vt SSL_CTX
object pointed to by
.Fa ctx
and frees up the allocated memory if the reference count has reached 0.
If
.Fa ctx
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, no action occurs.
.Pp
It also calls the
.Xr free 3 Ns ing
procedures for indirectly affected items, if applicable:
the session cache, the list of ciphers, the list of Client CAs,
the certificates and keys.
.Sh WARNINGS
If a session-remove callback is set
.Pq Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_remove_cb 3 ,
this callback will be called for each session being freed from
.Fa ctx Ns 's
session cache.
This implies that all corresponding sessions from an external session cache are
removed as well.
If this is not desired, the user should explicitly unset the callback by
calling
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_set_remove_cb ctx NULL
prior to calling
.Fn SSL_CTX_free .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_new 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_get_cb 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_free
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.1 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
