.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_set1_groups.3,v 1.3 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL SSL_CTX_set1_curves.pod de4d764e Nov 9 14:51:06 2016 +0000
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2013, 2014, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_SET1_GROUPS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_set1_groups ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_set1_groups_list ,
.Nm SSL_set1_groups ,
.Nm SSL_set1_groups_list ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_set1_curves ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_set1_curves_list ,
.Nm SSL_set1_curves ,
.Nm SSL_set1_curves_list
.Nd choose supported EC groups
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_set1_groups
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "const int *glist"
.Fa "size_t glistlen"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_set1_groups_list
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "const char *list"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_set1_groups
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "const int *glist"
.Fa "size_t glistlen"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_set1_groups_list
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "const char *list"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_set1_curves
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "const int *clist"
.Fa "size_t clistlen"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_set1_curves_list
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "const char *list"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_set1_curves
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "const int *clist"
.Fa "size_t clistlen"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_set1_curves_list
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "const char *list"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_groups
sets the supported groups for
.Fa ctx
to the
.Fa glistlen
groups in the array
.Fa glist .
The array consists of group NIDs in preference order.
For a TLS client, the groups are used directly in the supported groups
extension.
For a TLS server, the groups are used to determine the set of shared
groups.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_groups_list
sets the supported groups for
.Fa ctx
to the
.Fa list
represented as a colon separated list of group NIDs or names, for example
"P-521:P-384:P-256".
.Pp
.Fn SSL_set1_groups
and
.Fn SSL_set1_groups_list
are similar except that they set supported groups for the SSL structure
.Fa ssl
only.
.Pp
The curve functions are deprecated synonyms for the equivalently
named group functions and are identical in every respect except
that they are implemented as macros.
They exist because prior to TLS1.3, there was only the concept of
supported curves.
In TLS1.3, this was renamed to supported groups and extended to include
Diffie Hellman groups.
.Pp
If an application wishes to make use of several of these functions for
configuration purposes either on a command line or in a file, it should
consider using the SSL_CONF interface instead of manually parsing
options.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
All these functions return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_add_extra_chain_cert 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_cipher_list 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_options 3 ,
.Xr SSL_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
The curve functions first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.2
and the group functions in OpenSSL 1.1.1.
Both have been available since
.Ox 6.1 .
