.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_load_client_CA_file.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file is a derived work.
.\" The changes are covered by the following Copyright and license:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" The original file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_LOAD_CLIENT_CA_FILE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_load_client_CA_file ,
.Nm SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack ,
.Nm SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
.Nd load certificate names from files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft STACK_OF(X509_NAME) *
.Fn SSL_load_client_CA_file "const char *file"
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509_NAME) *stack"
.Fa "const char *file"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509_NAME) *stack"
.Fa "const char *dir"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_load_client_CA_file
reads PEM formatted certificates from
.Fa file
and returns a new
.Vt STACK_OF(X509_NAME)
with the subject names found.
While the name suggests the specific usage as a support function for
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_client_CA_list 3 ,
it is not limited to CA certificates.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack
is similar except that the names are added to the existing
.Fa stack .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
calls
.Fn SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack
on every file in the directory
.Fa dir .
.Pp
If a name is already on the stack, all these functions skip it and
do not add it again.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_load_client_CA_file
returns a pointer to the new
.Vt STACK_OF(X509_NAME)
or
.Dv NULL on failure .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack
and
.Fn SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Pp
All these functions treat empty files and directories as failures.
.Pp
In some cases of failure, the reason can be determined with
.Xr ERR_get_error 3 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
Load names of CAs from a file and use it as a client CA list:
.Bd -literal
SSL_CTX *ctx;
STACK_OF(X509_NAME) *cert_names;
\&...
cert_names = SSL_load_client_CA_file("/path/to/CAfile.pem");
if (cert_names != NULL)
	SSL_CTX_set_client_CA_list(ctx, cert_names);
else
	error_handling();
\&...
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr PEM_read_bio_X509 3 ,
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_client_CA_list 3 ,
.Xr X509_get_subject_name 3 ,
.Xr X509_NAME_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_load_client_CA_file
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack
and
.Fn SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.2b and have been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.Fn SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack
and
.Fn SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
were written by
.An Ben Laurie Aq Mt ben@openssl.org
in 1999.
.Sh BUGS
In some cases of failure, for example for empty files and directories,
these functions fail to report an error, in the sense that
.Xr ERR_get_error 3
does not work.
.Pp
Even in case of failure, for example when parsing one of the
files or certificates fails,
.Fn SSL_add_file_cert_subjects_to_stack
and
.Fn SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
may still have added some certificates to the stack.
.Pp
The behaviour of
.Fn SSL_add_dir_cert_subjects_to_stack
is non-deterministic.
If parsing one file fails, parsing of the whole directory is aborted.
Files in the directory are not parsed in any specific order.
For example, adding an empty file to
.Fa dir
may or may not cause some of the other files to be ignored.
