.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_get_certificate.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_GET_CERTIFICATE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_get_certificate ,
.Nm SSL_get_privatekey
.Nd get SSL certificate and private key
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft X509 *
.Fo SSL_get_certificate
.Fa "const SSL *ssl"
.Fc
.Ft EVP_PKEY *
.Fo SSL_get_privatekey
.Fa "const SSL *ssl"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions retrieve certificate and key data from an
.Vt SSL
object.
They return internal pointers that must not be freed by the application
program.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_get_certificate
returns the active X.509 certificate currently used by
.Fa ssl
or
.Dv NULL
if none is active.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_privatekey
returns the active private key currently used by
.Fa ssl
or
.Dv NULL
if none is active.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_check_private_key 3 ,
.Xr SSL_use_certificate 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_get_certificate
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.2a.
.Fn SSL_get_privatekey
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0.
Both functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
