.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_get_version.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:49:42 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL e417070c Jun 8 11:37:06 2016 -0400
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL df75c2bf Dec 9 01:02:36 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2005, 2014 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_GET_VERSION 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_get_version ,
.Nm SSL_is_dtls ,
.Nm SSL_version
.Nd get the protocol information of a connection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft const char *
.Fn SSL_get_version "const SSL *ssl"
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_is_dtls "const SSL *ssl"
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_version "const SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_get_version
returns the name of the protocol used for the connection
.Fa ssl .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_is_dtls
returns 1 if the connection is using DTLS, 0 if not.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_version
returns an integer constant representing that protocol.
.Pp
These functions only return reliable results
after the initial handshake has been completed.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The following strings or integers can be returned by
.Fn SSL_get_version
and
.Fn SSL_version :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Qo TLSv1 Qc No or Dv TLS1_VERSION
The connection uses the TLSv1.0 protocol.
.It Qo TLSv1.1 Qc No or Dv TLS1_1_VERSION
The connection uses the TLSv1.1 protocol.
.It Qo TLSv1.2 Qc No or Dv TLS1_2_VERSION
The connection uses the TLSv1.2 protocol.
.It Qo TLSv1.3 Qc No or Dv TLS1_3_VERSION
The connection uses the TLSv1.3 protocol.
.It Qo DTLSv1 Qc No or Dv DTLS1_VERSION
The connection uses the Datagram Transport Layer Security 1.0 protocol.
.It Qo DTLSv1.2 Qc No or Dv DTLS1_2_VERSION
The connection uses the Datagram Transport Layer Security 1.2 protocol.
.It Qq unknown
This indicates an unknown protocol version;
it cannot currently happen with LibreSSL.
.El
.Pp
.Fn SSL_is_dtls
returns 1 if the connection uses DTLS, 0 if not.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_get_version
and
.Fn SSL_version
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_is_dtls
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 6.9 .
