.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_SESSION_set1_id_context.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to:
.\" OpenSSL SSL_SESSION_get0_id_context b31db505 Mar 24 16:01:50 2017
.\"
.\" This file was written by Matt Caswell <matt@openssl.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_SESSION_SET1_ID_CONTEXT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_SESSION_get0_id_context ,
.Nm SSL_SESSION_set1_id_context
.Nd get and set the SSL ID context associated with a session
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft const unsigned char *
.Fo SSL_SESSION_get0_id_context
.Fa "const SSL_SESSION *s"
.Fa "unsigned int *len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_SESSION_set1_id_context
.Fa "SSL_SESSION *s"
.Fa "const unsigned char *sid_ctx"
.Fa "unsigned int sid_ctx_len"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get0_id_context
returns the ID context associated with
.Fa s .
The length of the ID context in bytes is written to
.Pf * Fa len
if
.Fa len
is not
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set1_id_context
takes a copy of the provided ID context given in
.Fa sid_ctx
and associates it with the session
.Fa s .
The length of the ID context is given by
.Fa sid_ctx_len
which must not exceed
.Dv SSL_MAX_SID_CTX_LENGTH
bytes.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get0_id_context
returns an internal pointer to an object maintained within
.Fa s
that should not be freed by the caller.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set1_id_context
returns 1 on success or 0 on error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_id_context 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_session 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_SESSION_set1_id_context
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.1 and has been available since
.Ox 5.3 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_SESSION_get0_id_context
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.0 and has been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
