.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_set_mode.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to: OpenSSL 8671b898 Jun 3 02:48:34 2008 +0000
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL df75c2bf Dec 9 01:02:36 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org> and
.\" Ben Laurie <ben@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2008 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_SET_MODE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_set_mode ,
.Nm SSL_set_mode ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_clear_mode ,
.Nm SSL_clear_mode ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_get_mode ,
.Nm SSL_get_mode
.Nd manipulate SSL engine mode
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_mode "SSL_CTX *ctx" "long mode"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_set_mode "SSL *ssl" "long mode"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_clear_mode "SSL_CTX *ctx" "long mode"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_clear_mode "SSL *ssl" "long mode"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_mode "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_get_mode "SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_mode
and
.Fn SSL_set_mode
enable the options contained in the bitmask
.Fa mode
for the
.Fa ctx
or
.Fa ssl
object, respectively.
Options that were already enabled before the call are not disabled.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_clear_mode
and
.Fn SSL_clear_mode
disable the options contained in the bitmask
.Fa mode
for the
.Fa ctx
or
.Fa ssl
object.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_mode
and
.Fn SSL_get_mode
return a bitmask representing the options
that are currently enabled for the
.Fa ctx
or
.Fa ssl
object.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv SSL_MODE_ENABLE_PARTIAL_WRITE
Allow
.Fn SSL_write ... n
to return
.Ms r
with
.EQ
0 < r < n
.EN
(i.e., report success when just a single record has been written).
When not set (the default),
.Xr SSL_write 3
will only report success once the complete chunk was written.
Once
.Xr SSL_write 3
returns with
.Ms r ,
.Ms r
bytes have been successfully written and the next call to
.Xr SSL_write 3
must only send the
.Ms n \(mi r
bytes left, imitating the behaviour of
.Xr write 2 .
.It Dv SSL_MODE_ACCEPT_MOVING_WRITE_BUFFER
Make it possible to retry
.Xr SSL_write 3
with changed buffer location (the buffer contents must stay the same).
This is not the default to avoid the misconception that non-blocking
.Xr SSL_write 3
behaves like non-blocking
.Xr write 2 .
.It Dv SSL_MODE_AUTO_RETRY
Never bother the application with retries if the transport is blocking.
If a renegotiation takes place during normal operation, a
.Xr SSL_read 3
or
.Xr SSL_write 3
would return
with \(mi1 and indicate the need to retry with
.Dv SSL_ERROR_WANT_READ .
In a non-blocking environment applications must be prepared to handle
incomplete read/write operations.
In a blocking environment, applications are not always prepared to deal with
read/write operations returning without success report.
The flag
.Dv SSL_MODE_AUTO_RETRY
will cause read/write operations to only return after the handshake and
successful completion.
.It Dv SSL_MODE_RELEASE_BUFFERS
When we no longer need a read buffer or a write buffer for a given
.Vt SSL ,
then release the memory we were using to hold it.
Using this flag can save around 34k per idle SSL connection.
This flag has no effect on SSL v2 connections, or on DTLS connections.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_mode ,
.Fn SSL_set_mode ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_clear_mode ,
and
.Fn SSL_clear_mode
return the new mode bitmask after adding or clearing
.Fa mode .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_mode
and
.Fn SSL_get_mode
return the current bitmask.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_read 3 ,
.Xr SSL_write 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_mode ,
.Fn SSL_set_mode ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_mode ,
and
.Fn SSL_get_mode
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.4 and have been available since
.Ox 2.6 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_clear_mode
and
.Fn SSL_clear_mode
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.8m and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
.Pp
.Dv SSL_MODE_AUTO_RETRY
was added in OpenSSL 0.9.6.
