.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback.3,v 1.4 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" OpenSSL pod checked up to: 61f805c1 Jan 16 01:01:46 2018 +0800
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Bob Beck <beck@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_SET_KEYLOG_CALLBACK 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback
.Nd set and get the unused key logging callback
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft typedef void
.Fo (*SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func)
.Fa "const SSL *ssl"
.Fa "const char *line"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback "SSL_CTX *ctx" "SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func cb"
.Ft SSL_CTX_keylog_cb_func
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback "const SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_keylog_callback
sets the TLS key logging callback.
This callback is never called in LibreSSL.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback
retrieves the previously set TLS key logging callback.
.Pp
These functions are provided only for compatibility with OpenSSL.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_keylog_callback
returns the previously set TLS key logging callback, or
.Dv NULL
if no callback has been set.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
These function first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.1
and have been available since
.Ox 7.1 .
