.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_set_shutdown.3,v 1.8 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2005 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_SET_SHUTDOWN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_set_shutdown ,
.Nm SSL_get_shutdown
.Nd manipulate shutdown state of an SSL connection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft void
.Fn SSL_set_shutdown "SSL *ssl" "int mode"
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_get_shutdown "const SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_set_shutdown
sets the shutdown state of
.Fa ssl
to
.Fa mode .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_shutdown
returns the shutdown mode of
.Fa ssl .
.Pp
The shutdown state of an ssl connection is a bitmask of:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
No shutdown setting, yet.
.It Dv SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN
A
.Dq close notify
shutdown alert was sent to the peer; the connection is being considered closed
and the session is closed and correct.
.It Dv SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN
A shutdown alert was received from the peer, either a normal
.Dq close notify
or a fatal error.
.El
.Pp
.Dv SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN
and
.Dv SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN
can be set at the same time.
.Pp
The shutdown state of the connection is used to determine the state of the
.Fa ssl
session.
If the session is still open when
.Xr SSL_clear 3
or
.Xr SSL_free 3
is called, it is considered bad and removed according to RFC 2246.
The actual condition for a correctly closed session is
.Dv SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN
(according to the TLS RFC, it is acceptable to only send the
.Dq close notify
alert but to not wait for the peer's answer when the underlying connection is
closed).
.Fn SSL_set_shutdown
can be used to set this state without sending a close alert to the peer (see
.Xr SSL_shutdown 3 ) .
.Pp
If a
.Dq close notify
was received,
.Dv SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN
will be set, but to set
.Dv SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN
the application must still call
.Xr SSL_shutdown 3
or
.Fn SSL_set_shutdown
itself.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_get_shutdown
returns the current setting.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_clear 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown 3 ,
.Xr SSL_free 3 ,
.Xr SSL_shutdown 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_set_shutdown
and
.Fn SSL_get_shutdown
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
