.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_add1_chain_cert.3,v 1.3 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" selective merge up to: OpenSSL df75c2bf Dec 9 01:02:36 2018 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>
.\" and Rob Stradling <rob.stradling@comodo.com>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_ADD1_CHAIN_CERT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_set0_chain ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_set1_chain ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_add0_chain_cert ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_add1_chain_cert ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_get0_chain_certs ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_clear_chain_certs ,
.Nm SSL_set0_chain ,
.Nm SSL_set1_chain ,
.Nm SSL_add0_chain_cert ,
.Nm SSL_add1_chain_cert ,
.Nm SSL_get0_chain_certs ,
.Nm SSL_clear_chain_certs
.Nd extra chain certificate processing
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_set0_chain
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *chain"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_set1_chain
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *chain"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_add0_chain_cert
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "X509 *cert"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_add1_chain_cert
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "X509 *cert"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_get0_chain_certs
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) **chain"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_clear_chain_certs
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_set0_chain
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *chain"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_set1_chain
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) *chain"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_add0_chain_cert
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "X509 *cert"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_add1_chain_cert
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "X509 *cert"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_get0_chain_certs
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "STACK_OF(X509) **chain"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_clear_chain_certs
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_set0_chain
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_chain
set the certificate chain associated with the current certificate of
.Fa ctx
to
.Fa chain .
The
.Fa chain
is not supposed to include the current certificate itself.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_add0_chain_cert
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_add1_chain_cert
append the single certificate
.Fa cert
to the chain associated with the current certificate of
.Fa ctx .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get0_chain_certs
retrieves the chain associated with the current certificate of
.Fa ctx .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_clear_chain_certs
clears the existing chain associated with the current certificate of
.Fa ctx ,
if any.
This is equivalent to calling
.Fn SSL_CTX_set0_chain
with
.Fa chain
set to
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
Each of these functions operates on the
.Em current
end entity (i.e. server or client) certificate.
This is the last certificate loaded or selected on the corresponding
.Fa ctx
structure, for example using
.Xr SSL_CTX_use_certificate 3 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_set0_chain ,
.Fn SSL_set1_chain ,
.Fn SSL_add0_chain_cert ,
.Fn SSL_add1_chain_cert ,
.Fn SSL_get0_chain_certs ,
and
.Fn SSL_clear_chain_certs
are similar except that they operate on the
.Fa ssl
connection.
.Pp
The functions containing a
.Sy 1
in their name increment the reference count of the supplied certificate
or chain, so it must be freed at some point after the operation.
Those containing a
.Sy 0
do not increment reference counts and the supplied certificate or chain
must not be freed after the operation.
.Pp
The chains associated with an
.Vt SSL_CTX
structure are copied to the new
.Vt SSL
structure when
.Xr SSL_new 3
is called.
Existing
.Vt SSL
structures are not affected by any chains subsequently changed
in the parent
.Vt SSL_CTX .
.Pp
One chain can be set for each key type supported by a server.
So, for example, an RSA and an ECDSA certificate can have
different chains.
.Pp
If any certificates are added using these functions, no certificates
added using
.Xr SSL_CTX_add_extra_chain_cert 3
will be used.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_add_extra_chain_cert 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_use_certificate 3
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.2
and have been available since
.Ox 6.5 .
