.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_set_max_send_fragment.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL doc/man3/SSL_CTX_set_split_send_fragment.pod
.\"	OpenSSL 6782e5fd Oct 21 16:16:20 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Matt Caswell <matt@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_SET_MAX_SEND_FRAGMENT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_set_max_send_fragment ,
.Nm SSL_set_max_send_fragment
.Nd control fragment sizes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft long
.Fo SSL_CTX_set_max_send_fragment
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "long m"
.Fc
.Ft long
.Fo SSL_set_max_send_fragment
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "long m"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_max_send_fragment
and
.Fn SSL_set_max_send_fragment
set the
.Sy max_send_fragment
parameter for SSL_CTX and SSL objects respectively.
This value restricts the amount of plaintext bytes that will be sent in
any one SSL/TLS record.
By default its value is SSL3_RT_MAX_PLAIN_LENGTH (16384).
These functions will only accept a value in the range 512 -
SSL3_RT_MAX_PLAIN_LENGTH.
.Pp
These functions are implemented using macros.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
These functions return 1 on success or 0 on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_read_ahead 3 ,
.Xr SSL_pending 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_max_send_fragment
and
.Fn SSL_set_max_send_fragment
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
