.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_set_cert_store.3,v 1.9 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2002, 2005 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_SET_CERT_STORE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_set_cert_store ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_get_cert_store
.Nd manipulate X509 certificate verification storage
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft void
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_cert_store "SSL_CTX *ctx" "X509_STORE *store"
.Ft void
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store "SSL_CTX *ctx" "X509_STORE *store"
.Ft X509_STORE *
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_cert_store "const SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_cert_store
sets the verification storage of
.Fa ctx
to or replaces it with
.Fa store .
If another
.Vt X509_STORE
object is currently set in
.Fa ctx ,
it will be freed.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store
sets the verification storage of
.Fa ctx
to or replaces it with
.Fa store .
The
.Fa store Ns 's
reference count is incremented.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_cert_store
returns a pointer to the current certificate verification storage.
.Pp
In order to verify the certificates presented by the peer, trusted CA
certificates must be accessed.
These CA certificates are made available via lookup methods, handled inside the
.Vt X509_STORE .
From the
.Vt X509_STORE
the
.Vt X509_STORE_CTX
used when verifying certificates is created.
.Pp
Typically the trusted certificate store is handled indirectly via using
.Xr SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations 3 .
Using the
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_cert_store
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_cert_store
functions it is possible to manipulate the
.Vt X509_STORE
object beyond the
.Xr SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations 3
call.
.Pp
Currently no detailed documentation on how to use the
.Vt X509_STORE
object is available.
Not all members of the
.Vt X509_STORE
are used when the verification takes place.
So will, for example, the
.Fn verify_callback
be overridden with the
.Fn verify_callback
set via the
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_verify 3
family of functions.
This document must therefore be updated when documentation about the
.Vt X509_STORE
object and its handling becomes available.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_cert_store
returns the current setting.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_verify 3 ,
.Xr X509_STORE_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_set_cert_store
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_get_cert_store
first appeared in SSLeay 0.8.1 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_cert_store
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.1.1 and has been available since
.Ox 7.6 .
