.\" $OpenBSD: SSL_set1_param.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\" full merge up to:
.\" OpenSSL man3/SSL_CTX_get0_param 99d63d46 Oct 26 13:56:48 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Dr. Stephen Henson <steve@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_SET1_PARAM 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_get0_param ,
.Nm SSL_get0_param ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_set1_param ,
.Nm SSL_set1_param
.Nd get and set verification parameters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft X509_VERIFY_PARAM *
.Fo SSL_CTX_get0_param
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fc
.Ft X509_VERIFY_PARAM *
.Fo SSL_get0_param
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_CTX_set1_param
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "X509_VERIFY_PARAM *vpm"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo SSL_set1_param
.Fa "SSL *ssl"
.Fa "X509_VERIFY_PARAM *vpm"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_get0_param
and
.Fn SSL_get0_param
retrieve an internal pointer to the verification parameters for
.Fa ctx
or
.Fa ssl ,
respectively.
The returned pointer must not be freed by the calling application,
but the application can modify the parameters pointed to,
to suit its needs: for example to add a hostname check.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_param
and
.Fn SSL_set1_param
set the verification parameters to
.Fa vpm
for
.Fa ctx
or
.Fa ssl .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_CTX_get0_param
and
.Fn SSL_get0_param
return a pointer to an
.Vt X509_VERIFY_PARAM
structure.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_param
and
.Fn SSL_set1_param
return 1 for success or 0 for failure.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Check that the hostname matches
.Pa www.foo.com
in the peer certificate:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
X509_VERIFY_PARAM *vpm = SSL_get0_param(ssl);
X509_VERIFY_PARAM_set1_host(vpm, "www.foo.com", 0);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr X509_VERIFY_PARAM_set_flags 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_set1_param
and
.Fn SSL_set1_param
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.0 and have been available since
.Ox 4.9 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_get0_param
and
.Fn SSL_get0_param
first appeared in OpenSSL 1.0.2 and have been available since
.Ox 6.3 .
