.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_get_fd.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2005, 2013 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_GET_FD 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_get_fd ,
.Nm SSL_get_rfd ,
.Nm SSL_get_wfd
.Nd get file descriptor linked to an SSL object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_get_fd "const SSL *ssl"
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_get_rfd "const SSL *ssl"
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_get_wfd "const SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_get_fd
returns the file descriptor which is linked to
.Fa ssl .
.Fn SSL_get_rfd
and
.Fn SSL_get_wfd
return the file descriptors for the read or the write channel,
which can be different.
If the read and the write channel are different,
.Fn SSL_get_fd
will return the file descriptor of the read channel.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The following return values can occur:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It \(mi1
The operation failed, because the underlying
.Vt BIO
is not of the correct type (suitable for file descriptors).
.It \(>=0
The file descriptor linked to
.Fa ssl .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BIO_new 3 ,
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_fd 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_get_fd
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_get_rfd
and
.Fn SSL_get_wfd
first appeared in OpenSSL 0.9.6c and have been available since
.Ox 3.2 .
