.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_rstate_string.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_RSTATE_STRING 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_rstate_string ,
.Nm SSL_rstate_string_long
.Nd get textual description of state of an SSL object during read operation
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft const char *
.Fn SSL_rstate_string "SSL *ssl"
.Ft const char *
.Fn SSL_rstate_string_long "SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_rstate_string
returns a 2-letter string indicating the current read state of the
.Vt SSL
object
.Fa ssl .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_rstate_string_long
returns a string indicating the current read state of the
.Vt SSL
object
.Fa ssl .
.Pp
When performing a read operation, the SSL/TLS engine must parse the record,
consisting of header and body.
When working in a blocking environment,
.Fn SSL_rstate_string[_long]
should always return
.Qo RD Qc Ns / Ns Qo read done Qc .
.Pp
This function should only seldom be needed in applications.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_rstate_string
and
.Fn SSL_rstate_string_long
can return the following values:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Qo RH Qc Ns / Ns Qo read header Qc
The header of the record is being evaluated.
.It Qo RB Qc Ns / Ns Qo read body Qc
The body of the record is being evaluated.
.It Qo RD Qc Ns / Ns Qo read done Qc
The record has been completely processed.
.It Qo unknown Qc Ns / Ns Qo unknown Qc
The read state is unknown.
This should never happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_rstate_string
and
.Fn SSL_rstate_string_long
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0 and have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
