.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_pending.3,v 1.6 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL a528d4f0 Oct 27 13:40:11 2015 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>,
.\" Bodo Moeller <bodo@openssl.org>, and Matt Caswell <matt@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2005, 2015, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_PENDING 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_pending
.Nd obtain number of readable bytes buffered in an SSL object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_pending "const SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Data is received in whole blocks known as records from the peer.
A whole record is processed, for example decrypted, in one go and
is buffered until it is read by the application via a call to
.Xr SSL_read 3 .
.Pp
.Fn SSL_pending
returns the number of bytes of application data which are available
for immediate read.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_pending
takes into account only bytes from the TLS/SSL record that is
currently being processed (if any).
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn SSL_pending
returns the number of buffered and processed application data
bytes that are pending and are available for immediate read.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_read 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_pending
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
.Sh BUGS
Up to OpenSSL 0.9.6,
.Fn SSL_pending
did not check if the record type of pending data is application data.
