.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_CTX_sess_number.3,v 1.10 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL SSL_CTX_sess_number.pod 7bd27895 Mar 29 11:45:29 2017 +1000
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_CTX_SESS_NUMBER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_number ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_connect ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_connect_good ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_connect_renegotiate ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_accept ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_accept_good ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_accept_renegotiate ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_hits ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_cb_hits ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_misses ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_timeouts ,
.Nm SSL_CTX_sess_cache_full
.Nd obtain session cache statistics
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_number "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect_good "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect_renegotiate "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept_good "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept_renegotiate "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_hits "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_cb_hits "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_misses "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_timeouts "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Ft long
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_cache_full "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_number
returns the current number of sessions in the internal session cache.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect
returns the number of started SSL/TLS handshakes in client mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect_good
returns the number of successfully established SSL/TLS sessions in client mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect_renegotiate
returns the number of started renegotiations in client mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept
returns the number of started SSL/TLS handshakes in server mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept_good
returns the number of successfully established SSL/TLS sessions in server mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept_renegotiate
returns the number of started renegotiations in server mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_hits
returns the number of successfully reused sessions.
In client mode a session set with
.Xr SSL_set_session 3
successfully reused is counted as a hit.
In server mode a session successfully retrieved from internal or external cache
is counted as a hit.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_cb_hits
returns the number of successfully retrieved sessions from the external session
cache in server mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_misses
returns the number of sessions proposed by clients that were not found in the
internal session cache in server mode.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_timeouts
returns the number of sessions proposed by clients and either found in the
internal or external session cache in server mode,
but that were invalid due to timeout.
These sessions are not included in the
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_hits
count.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_cache_full
returns the number of sessions that were removed because the maximum session
cache size was exceeded.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_ctrl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_sess_set_cache_size 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_cache_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_session 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_number ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect_good ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept_good ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_hits ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_misses ,
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_timeouts
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.2.
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_cb_hits
first appeared in SSLeay 0.6.0.
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_connect_renegotiate ,
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_accept_renegotiate ,
and
.Fn SSL_CTX_sess_cache_full
first appeared in SSLeay 0.9.0.
All these functions have been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
