.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_set_session.3,v 1.5 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL 05ea606a May 20 20:52:46 2016 -0400
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2001, 2016 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_SET_SESSION 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_set_session
.Nd set a TLS/SSL session to be used during TLS/SSL connect
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft int
.Fn SSL_set_session "SSL *ssl" "SSL_SESSION *session"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_set_session
sets
.Fa session
to be used when the TLS/SSL connection is to be established.
.Fn SSL_set_session
is only useful for TLS/SSL clients.
When the session is set, the reference count of
.Fa session
is incremented
by 1.
If the session is not reused, the reference count is decremented again during
.Fn SSL_connect .
Whether the session was reused can be queried with the
.Xr SSL_session_reused 3
call.
.Pp
If there is already a session set inside
.Fa ssl
(because it was set with
.Fn SSL_set_session
before or because the same
.Fa ssl
was already used for a connection),
.Xr SSL_SESSION_free 3
will be called for that session.
.Pp
.Vt SSL_SESSION
objects keep internal link information about the session cache list when being
inserted into one
.Vt SSL_CTX
object's session cache.
One
.Vt SSL_SESSION
object, regardless of its reference count, must therefore only be used with one
.Vt SSL_CTX
object (and the
.Vt SSL
objects created from this
.Vt SSL_CTX
object).
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The following return values can occur:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
The operation failed; check the error stack to find out the reason.
.It 1
The operation succeeded.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_session_cache_mode 3 ,
.Xr SSL_get_session 3 ,
.Xr SSL_SESSION_free 3 ,
.Xr SSL_session_reused 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_set_session
first appeared in SSLeay 0.5.2 and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
