.\"	$OpenBSD: SSL_free.3,v 1.7 2025/06/08 22:52:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"	OpenSSL b97fdb57 Nov 11 09:33:09 2016 +0100
.\"
.\" This file was written by Lutz Jaenicke <jaenicke@openssl.org>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2001 The OpenSSL Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\"    software must display the following acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit. (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" 4. The names "OpenSSL Toolkit" and "OpenSSL Project" must not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    prior written permission. For written permission, please contact
.\"    openssl-core@openssl.org.
.\"
.\" 5. Products derived from this software may not be called "OpenSSL"
.\"    nor may "OpenSSL" appear in their names without prior written
.\"    permission of the OpenSSL Project.
.\"
.\" 6. Redistributions of any form whatsoever must retain the following
.\"    acknowledgment:
.\"    "This product includes software developed by the OpenSSL Project
.\"    for use in the OpenSSL Toolkit (http://www.openssl.org/)"
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE OpenSSL PROJECT ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OpenSSL PROJECT OR
.\" ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED
.\" OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 8 2025 $
.Dt SSL_FREE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm SSL_free
.Nd free an allocated SSL structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libssl libcrypto
.In openssl/ssl.h
.Ft void
.Fn SSL_free "SSL *ssl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn SSL_free
decrements the reference count of
.Fa ssl ,
and removes the
.Vt SSL
structure pointed to by
.Fa ssl
and frees up the allocated memory if the reference count has reached 0.
If
.Fa ssl
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, no action occurs.
.Pp
.Fn SSL_free
also calls the
.Xr free 3 Ns
ing procedures for indirectly affected items, if applicable: the buffering
.Vt BIO ,
the read and write
.Vt BIOs ,
cipher lists specially created for this
.Fa ssl ,
the
.Sy SSL_SESSION .
Do not explicitly free these indirectly freed up items before or after calling
.Fn SSL_free ,
as trying to free things twice may lead to program failure.
.Pp
The
.Fa ssl
session has reference counts from two users: the
.Vt SSL
object, for which the reference count is removed by
.Fn SSL_free
and the internal session cache.
If the session is considered bad, because
.Xr SSL_shutdown 3
was not called for the connection and
.Xr SSL_set_shutdown 3
was not used to set the
.Vt SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN
state, the session will also be removed from the session cache as required by
RFC 2246.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssl 3 ,
.Xr SSL_clear 3 ,
.Xr SSL_new 3 ,
.Xr SSL_set_shutdown 3 ,
.Xr SSL_shutdown 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn SSL_free
appeared in SSLeay 0.4 or earlier and has been available since
.Ox 2.4 .
