.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Justin Hibbits
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Nathan Whitehorn <nwhitehorn@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 16, 2011
.Dt ABTN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm abtn
.Nd ADB Keyboard Special Keys Driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device adb"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the extended Fn keys on Apple notebooks with an ADB
interface.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports extended keyboard keys (special F-keys) on the following devices:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Apple iBook Keyboard
.It
Apple PowerBook Keyboard
.El
.Sh EVENTS
The
.Nm
driver sends events to
.Xr devd 8
for the following events under the
.Cd PMU
system, and
.Cd keys
subsystem:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Cd brightness
- Generates
.Cd up
and
.Cd down
notify types matching the pressed key.
.It
.Cd mute
.It
.Cd volume
- Generates
.Cd up
and
.Cd down
notify types matching the pressed key.
.It
.Cd eject
.El
.Pp
Examples are included in /etc/devd/apple.conf.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr adb 4 ,
.Xr akbd 4 ,
.Xr cuda 4 ,
.Xr pmu 4 ,
.Xr devd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Nx 5.0
and was ported to
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Tsubai Masanari
for
.Nx
and ported to
.Fx
by
.An Justin Hibbits .
