.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Nathan Whitehorn <nwhitehorn@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 6, 2008
.Dt PMU 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pmu
.Nd Apple PMU99 Power Management Driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device adb"
.Cd "device pmu"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Power Management Unit (PMU) found in Apple
Core99 hardware.
This includes late G3 laptops, all G4 machines, early G5
desktops and all G5 XServes.
.Pp
The Apple PMU controller is a multi-purpose ASIC that provides power
management and thermal control, as well as an ADB bus for the internal
keyboard and mouse on laptops.
.Sh HARDWARE
Chips supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Apple KeyLargo PMU
.It
Apple K2-KeyLargo PMU
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The
.Nm
driver provides power management services in addition to an
.Xr adb 4
interface.
The following sysctls can be used to control the
power management behavior and to examine current system power and
thermal conditions.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.server_mode
Restart after power failure behavior (1 causes system to reboot after power
cut, 0 causes system to remain off).
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.present
Indicates whether the relevant battery is inserted.
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.charging
Indicates whether the battery is currently charging.
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.charge
The current battery charge, in milliamp hours.
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.maxcharge
The battery's self-reported maximum charge, in milliamp hours.
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.rate
The current into the battery, in milliamps.
While the battery is discharging,
this will be negative.
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.voltage
Battery voltage, in millivolts.
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.time
Estimated time until full battery charge (or discharge), in minutes.
.It Va dev.pmu.%d.batteries.%d.life
Current fraction of the battery's maximum charge, in percent.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr adb 4 ,
.Xr led 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Nx 4.0 ,
and then in
.Fx 8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Michael Lorenz Aq Mt macallan@NetBSD.org
and ported to
.Fx
by
.An Nathan Whitehorn Aq Mt nwhitehorn@FreeBSD.org .
