.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Nathan Whitehorn <nwhitehorn@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 22, 2010
.Dt SMU 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm smu
.Nd Apple System Management Unit Driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device smu"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the System Management Unit (SMU) found in many
Apple G5 systems.
This includes most Power Macintosh G5 and all iMac G5 systems.
.Pp
The Apple SMU controller provides software power management and thermal
control functionality, and is responsible for managing system cooling
devices.
.Sh HARDWARE
Chips supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Apple System Management Unit
.El
.Sh THERMAL MANAGEMENT
The
.Nm
driver provides basic automatic thermal management. Without a userspace
daemon providing more advanced control, the driver will attempt to maintain
system temperatures in a conservative range through coarse-grained control of
system cooling devices (see below). Automatic kernel-level thermal control
will take over if more than 3 seconds elapses between userspace cooling
setting adjustments.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The
.Nm
driver provides power management services and thermal readout through a
sysctl interface.
The following sysctls can be used to control the
power management behavior and to examine current system power and
thermal conditions.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.smu.%d.server_mode
Restart after power failure behavior (1 causes system to reboot after power
cut, 0 causes system to remain off).
.It Va dev.smu.%d.target_temp
Target system temperature, in degrees Celsius. The
.Nm
driver will attempt to adjust fans to maintain the temperature of the
warmest component in the system at or below this level.
.It Va dev.smu.%d.critical_temp
System critical temperature, in degrees Celsius. If any component in
the system exceeds this temperature, the machine will be shut down within
500 ms.
.It Va dev.smu.%d.fans.%s.minrpm
Minimum allowed speed for this fan.
.It Va dev.smu.%d.fans.%s.maxrpm
Maximum allowed speed for this fan.
.It Va dev.smu.%d.fans.%s.rpm
Current speed for this fan. The fan speed can be adjusted by changing this
sysctl. If more than 3 seconds elapses between fan speed adjustments, the
kernel will resume automatic control of the fan.
.It Va dev.smu.%d.sensors.%s
Current reading from this sensor. Four sensor types are supported. Temperature
sensors are in units of degrees Celsius, current sensors in milliamps, voltage
sensors in millivolts, and power sensors in milliwatts.
.El
.Sh LED INTERFACE
The
.Nm
driver provides an
.Xr led 4
annunciator interface at
.Pa /dev/led/sleepled .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr led 4 ,
.Xr pmu 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Fx 8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Nathan Whitehorn Aq Mt nwhitehorn@FreeBSD.org .
