.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Semihalf, Rafal Jaworowski
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 20, 2015
.Dt TSEC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tsec
.Nd "Freescale Three-Speed Ethernet Controller device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device tsec"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the gigabit Ethernet controller integrated in
some of the Freescale system-on-chip devices.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps operation
.It 1000baseT
Set 1000baseT operation
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Set full duplex operation
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports polled operation when the system is configured with
DEVICE_POLLING kernel option, see
.Xr polling 4
for more details.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports reception and transmission of extended frames
for
.Xr vlan 4 .
This capability of
.Nm
can be controlled by means of the
.Cm vlanmtu
parameter
to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports interrupts coalescing (IC) so that raising a transmit/receive
frame interrupt is delayed, if possible, until a threshold-defined period of
time has elapsed, or a threshold-defined frame counter has been reached
(whichever occurs first).
The following sysctls regulate this behaviour:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.tsec.X.int_coal.rx_time
.It Va dev.tsec.X.int_coal.rx_count
.It Va dev.tsec.X.int_coal.tx_time
.It Va dev.tsec.X.int_coal.tx_count
.Pp
Value of 0 for either time or count disables IC on the given path.
Time value
1-65535 corresponds to a real time period and is expressed in units equivalent
to 64 ticks of the TSEC clock.
Count 1-255 represents the number of frames
(note that value of 1 is equivalent to IC disabled).
User provided values
larger than supported will be trimmed to the maximum supported.
More details
are available in the reference manual of the device.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
Gigabit Ethernet controllers built into the following Freescale
system-on-chip devices are known to work with the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
MPC8349
.It
MPC8533, MPC8541, MPC8555
.El
.Pp
The enhanced version of the controller (eTSEC), integrated in the following
devices, is also supported by this driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
MPC8548, MPC8572
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The base version of
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Piotr Kruszynski .
It has been extended with polling and interrupt coalescing support by
.An Rafal Jaworowski .
It has been further enhanced with multicast, h/w checksum calculation and vlan
support by
.An Piotr Ziecik .
This manual page was written by
.An Rafal Jaworowski .
