.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Scott Long
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd July 10, 2009
.Dt AAC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aac
.Nd Adaptec AdvancedRAID Controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd device pci
.Cd device aac
.Cd device aacp
.Pp
To compile in debugging code:
.Cd options AAC_DEBUG=N
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
aac_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Adaptec AAC family of SCSI Ultra2, Ultra160,
and Ultra320, SATA and SAS RAID controllers.
.Pp
Access to RAID containers is available via the
.Pa /dev/aacd?
device nodes.
The
.Nm aacp
device enables the SCSI pass-thru interface and allows devices connected
to the card such as CD-ROMs to be available via the CAM
.Xr scsi 4
subsystem.
Note that not all cards allow this interface to be enabled.
.Pp
The
.Pa /dev/aac?
device nodes provide access to the management interface of the controller.
One node exists per installed card.
The aliases
.Pa /dev/afa?
and
.Pa /dev/hpn?
exist for compatibility with the Dell and HP versions of management tools,
respectively.
If the kernel is compiled with the
.Dv COMPAT_LINUX
option, or the
.Pa aac_linux.ko
and
.Pa linux.ko
modules are loaded, the
Linux-compatible
.Xr ioctl 2
interface for the management device will be enabled and will allow
Linux-based management applications to control the card.
.Sh HARDWARE
Controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Adaptec AAC-364
.It
Adaptec RAID 2045
.It
Adaptec RAID 2405
.It
Adaptec RAID 2445
.It
Adaptec RAID 2805
.It
Adaptec RAID 3085
.It
Adaptec RAID 31205
.It
Adaptec RAID 31605
.It
Adaptec RAID 5085
.It
Adaptec RAID 51205
.It
Adaptec RAID 51245
.It
Adaptec RAID 51605
.It
Adaptec RAID 51645
.It
Adaptec RAID 52445
.It
Adaptec RAID 5405
.It
Adaptec RAID 5445
.It
Adaptec RAID 5805
.It
Adaptec SAS RAID 3405
.It
Adaptec SAS RAID 3805
.It
Adaptec SAS RAID 4000SAS
.It
Adaptec SAS RAID 4005SAS
.It
Adaptec SAS RAID 4800SAS
.It
Adaptec SAS RAID 4805SAS
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2020SA ZCR
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2025SA ZCR
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2026ZCR
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2410SA
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2420SA
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2610SA
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2620SA
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2810SA
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 2820SA
.It
Adaptec SATA RAID 21610SA
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2020ZCR
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2025ZCR
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2120S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2130S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2130SLP
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2230SLP
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2200S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2240S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 3230S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 3240S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 5400S
.It
Dell CERC SATA RAID 2
.It
Dell PERC 2/Si
.It
Dell PERC 2/QC
.It
Dell PERC 3/Si
.It
Dell PERC 3/Di
.It
Dell PERC 320/DC
.It
HP ML110 G2 (Adaptec SATA RAID 2610SA)
.It
HP NetRAID 4M
.It
IBM ServeRAID 8i
.It
IBM ServeRAID 8k
.It
IBM ServeRAID 8s
.It
ICP RAID ICP5045BL
.It
ICP RAID ICP5085BL
.It
ICP RAID ICP5085SL
.It
ICP RAID ICP5125BR
.It
ICP RAID ICP5125SL
.It
ICP RAID ICP5165BR
.It
ICP RAID ICP5165SL
.It
ICP RAID ICP5445SL
.It
ICP RAID ICP5805BL
.It
ICP RAID ICP5805SL
.It
ICP ICP5085BR SAS RAID
.It
ICP ICP9085LI SAS RAID
.It
ICP ICP9047MA SATA RAID
.It
ICP ICP9067MA SATA RAID
.It
ICP ICP9087MA SATA RAID
.It
ICP ICP9014RO SCSI RAID
.It
ICP ICP9024RO SCSI RAID
.It
Legend S220
.It
Legend S230
.It
Sun STK RAID REM
.It
Sun STK RAID EM
.It
SG-XPCIESAS-R-IN
.It
SG-XPCIESAS-R-EX
.It
AOC-USAS-S4i
.It
AOC-USAS-S8i
.It
AOC-USAS-S4iR
.It
AOC-USAS-S8iR
.It
AOC-USAS-S8i-LP
.It
AOC-USAS-S8iR-LP
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /boot/kernel/aac.ko -compact
.It Pa /dev/aac?
aac management interface
.It Pa /dev/aacd?
disk/container interface
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Compiling with
.Dv AAC_DEBUG
set to a number between 0 and 3
will enable increasingly verbose debug messages.
.Pp
The adapter can send status and alert messages asynchronously
to the driver.
These messages are printed on the system console,
and are also queued for retrieval by a management application.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kld 4 ,
.Xr linux 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr kldload 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Mike Smith Aq Mt msmith@FreeBSD.org
.An Scott Long Aq Mt scottl@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
This driver is not compatible with Dell controllers that have version 1.x
firmware.
The firmware version is the same as the kernel version printed in the BIOS
POST and driver attach messages.
.Pp
The controller is not actually paused on suspend/resume.
