.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 OGAWA Takaya <t-ogawa@triaez.kaisei.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 19, 2015
.Dt ACPI_PANASONIC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_panasonic
.Nd "ACPI hotkey driver for Panasonic laptops"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_panasonic"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_panasonic_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver enables such hotkey facilities of various Panasonic laptops as
changing LCD brightness, controlling mixer volumes, entering sleep or
suspended state and so on.
On the following models it is reported to work: Let's note (or
Toughbook, outside Japan) CF-R1N, CF-R2A and CF-R3.
It may also work on other models as well.
.Pp
The driver consists of three functionalities.
The first is to detect hotkey events and take corresponding actions,
which include changing LCD luminance and speaker mute state.
The second role is to notify occurrences of the event by way of
.Xr devctl 4
and eventually to
.Xr devd 8 .
The third and last is to provide a way to adjust LCD brightness and
sound mute state via
.Xr sysctl 8 .
.Ss Hotkeys
There are 9 hotkeys available on the supported hardware:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 10n -compact -offset indent
.It Sy Fn+F1
Make LCD backlight darker.
.It Sy Fn+F2
Make LCD backlight brighter.
.It Sy Fn+F3
Switch video output between LCD and CRT.
Not supported by the
.Nm
driver.
.It Sy Fn+F4
Toggle muting the speaker.
.It Sy Fn+F5
Turn the mixer volume down.
.It Sy Fn+F6
Turn the mixer volume up.
.It Sy Fn+F7
Enter suspend-to-RAM state.
.It Sy Fn+F9
Show battery status.
.It Sy Fn+F10
Enter suspend-to-disk state.
.El
.Pp
Actions are automatically taken within the driver for
.Sy Fn+F1 , Fn+F2
and
.Sy Fn+F4 .
For the other events such as
mixer control and showing battery status,
.Xr devd 8
should take the role as described below.
.Ss Xr devd 8 Events
When notified to
.Xr devd 8 ,
the hotkey event provides the following information:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 10n -compact -offset indent
.It system
.Qq Li ACPI
.It subsystem
.Qq Li Panasonic
.It type
The source of the event in ACPI namespace.
The value depends on the model but typically
.Qq Li \e_SB_.HKEY .
.It notify
Event code (see below).
.El
.Pp
Event codes to be generated are assigned as follows:
.Bl -tag -width 10n -offset indent
.It 0x81-0x86, 0x89
.Sy Fn+F<n>
pressed.
0x81 corresponds to
.Sy Fn+F1 ,
0x82 corresponds to
.Sy Fn+F2 ,
and so on.
.It 0x01-0x07, 0x09, 0x1a
.Sy Fn+F<n>
released.
0x01 corresponds to
.Sy Fn+F1 ,
0x02 corresponds to
.Sy Fn+F2 ,
and so on.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following MIBs are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.acpi.panasonic.lcd_brightness_max
The maximum level of brightness.
This read-only value is
automatically set according to hardware model.
.It Va hw.acpi.panasonic.lcd_brightness_min
The minimum level of brightness.
This read-only value is
automatically set according to hardware model.
.It Va hw.acpi.panasonic.lcd_brightness
Current brightness level of the LCD (read-write).
The value ranges from
.Va hw.acpi.panasonic.lcd_brightness_min
to
.Va hw.acpi.panasonic.lcd_brightness_max .
.It Va hw.acpi.panasonic.sound_mute
A read-write boolean flag to control whether to mute the speaker.
The value 1 means to mute and 0 not.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr devd.conf 5 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An OGAWA Takaya Aq Mt t-ogawa@triaez.kaisei.org
and
.An TAKAHASHI Yoshihiro Aq Mt nyan@FreeBSD.org .
