.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Christian Brueffer
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Markus Brueffer
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 19, 2015
.Dt ACPI_IBM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_ibm
.Nd "ACPI extras driver for IBM laptops"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_ibm"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_ibm_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for hotkeys and other components of IBM laptops.
The main purpose of this driver is to provide an interface,
accessible via
.Xr sysctl 8
and
.Xr devd 8 ,
through which applications can determine the status of
various laptop components.
.Pp
While the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface is enabled automatically after loading the driver, the
.Xr devd 8
interface has to be enabled explicitly, as it may alter the default action of
certain keys.
This is done by setting the
.Va events
sysctl as described below.
Specifying which keys should generate events is done by setting a bitmask,
whereas each bit represents one key or key combination.
This bitmask, accessible via the
.Va eventmask
sysctl, is set to
.Va availmask
by default, a value representing all possible keypress events on the specific
ThinkPad model.
.Ss Xr devd 8 Events
Hotkey events received by
.Xr devd 8
provide the following information:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "subsystem" -offset indent -compact
.It system
.Qq Li ACPI
.It subsystem
.Qq Li IBM
.It type
The source of the event in the ACPI namespace.
The value depends on the model.
.It notify
Event code (see below).
.El
.Pp
Depending on the ThinkPad model, event codes may vary.
On a ThinkPad T41p these are as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "subsystem" -offset indent -compact
.It Li 0x01
Fn + F1
.It Li 0x02
Fn + F2
.It Li 0x03
Fn + F3 (LCD backlight)
.It Li 0x04
Fn + F4 (Suspend to RAM)
.It Li 0x05
Fn + F5 (Bluetooth)
.It Li 0x06
Fn + F6
.It Li 0x07
Fn + F7 (Screen expand)
.It Li 0x08
Fn + F8
.It Li 0x09
Fn + F9
.It Li 0x0a
Fn + F10
.It Li 0x0b
Fn + F11
.It Li 0x0c
Fn + F12 (Suspend to disk)
.It Li 0x0d
Fn + Backspace
.It Li 0x0e
Fn + Insert
.It Li 0x0f
Fn + Delete
.It Li 0x10
Fn + Home (Brightness up)
.It Li 0x11
Fn + End (Brightness down)
.It Li 0x12
Fn + PageUp (ThinkLight)
.It Li 0x13
Fn + PageDown
.It Li 0x14
Fn + Space (Zoom)
.It Li 0x15
Volume Up
.It Li 0x16
Volume Down
.It Li 0x17
Mute
.It Li 0x18
Access IBM Button
.El
.Ss Xr led 4 Interface
The
.Nm
driver provides a
.Xr led 4
interface for the ThinkLight.
The ThinkLight can be made to blink by writing
.Tn ASCII
strings to the
.Pa /dev/led/thinklight
device.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following sysctls are currently implemented:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.initialmask
(read-only)
Bitmask of ACPI events before the
.Nm
driver was loaded.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.availmask
(read-only)
Bitmask of all supported ACPI events.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.events
Enable ACPI events and set the
.Va eventmask
to
.Va availmask .
Without the
.Nm
driver being loaded, only the Fn+F4 button generates an ACPI event.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.eventmask
Sets the ACPI events which are reported to
.Xr devd 8 .
Fn+F3, Fn+F4 and Fn+F12 always generate ACPI events, regardless which value
.Va eventmask
has.
Depending on the ThinkPad model, the meaning of different bits in the
.Va eventmask
may vary.
On a ThinkPad T41p this is a bitwise OR of the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent-two -compact
.It Li 1
Fn + F1
.It Li 2
Fn + F2
.It Li 4
Fn + F3 (LCD backlight)
.It Li 8
Fn + F4 (Suspend to RAM)
.It Li 16
Fn + F5 (Bluetooth)
.It Li 32
Fn + F6
.It Li 64
Fn + F7 (Screen expand)
.It Li 128
Fn + F8
.It Li 256
Fn + F9
.It Li 512
Fn + F10
.It Li 1024
Fn + F11
.It Li 2048
Fn + F12 (Suspend to disk)
.It Li 4096
Fn + Backspace
.It Li 8192
Fn + Insert
.It Li 16384
Fn + Delete
.It Li 32768
Fn + Home (Brightness up)
.It Li 65536
Fn + End (Brightness down)
.It Li 131072
Fn + PageUp (ThinkLight)
.It Li 262144
Fn + PageDown
.It Li 524288
Fn + Space (Zoom)
.It Li 1048576
Volume Up
.It Li 2097152
Volume Down
.It Li 4194304
Mute
.It Li 8388608
Access IBM Button
.El
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.hotkey
(read-only)
Status of several buttons.
Every time a button is pressed, the respecting bit is toggled.
It is a bitwise OR of the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent-two -compact
.It Li 1
Home Button
.It Li 2
Search Button
.It Li 4
Mail Button
.It Li 8
Access IBM Button
.It Li 16
Zoom
.It Li 32
Wireless LAN Button
.It Li 64
Video Button
.It Li 128
Hibernate Button
.It Li 256
ThinkLight Button
.It Li 512
Screen Expand
.It Li 1024
Brightness Up/Down Button
.It Li 2048
Volume Up/Down/Mute Button
.El
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.lcd_brightness
Current brightness level of the display.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.volume
Speaker volume.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.mute
Indicates, whether the speakers are muted or not.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.mic_mute
Indicates, whether the microphone led (present on some model) is on or not. 
Note that this does not mean that the microphone input is muted.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.thinklight
Indicates, whether the ThinkLight keyboard light is activated or not.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.bluetooth
Toggle Bluetooth chip activity.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.wlan
(read-only)
Indicates whether the WLAN chip is active or not.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.fan
Indicates whether the fan is in automatic (1) or manual (0) mode.
Default is automatic mode.
This sysctl should be used with extreme precaution, since disabling automatic
fan control might overheat the ThinkPad and lead to permanent damage if the
.Va fan_level
is not set accordingly.
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.fan_level
Indicates at what speed the fan should run when being in manual mode.
Values are ranging from 0 (off) to 7 (max).
The resulting speed differs from model to model.
On a T41p this is as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent-two -compact
.It Li 0
off
.It Li 1, 2
~3000 RPM
.It Li 3, 4, 5
~3600 RPM
.It Li 6, 7
~4300 RPM
.El
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.fan_speed
(read-only)
Fan speed in rounds per minute.
A few older ThinkPads report the fan speed in levels ranging from 0 (off)
to 7 (max).
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.thermal
(read-only)
Shows the readings of up to eight different temperature sensors.
Most ThinkPads include six or more temperature sensors but
only expose the CPU temperature through
.Xr acpi_thermal 4 .
Some ThinkPads have the below sensor layout which might vary depending on the
specific model:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
CPU
.It
Mini PCI Module
.It
HDD
.It
GPU
.It
Built-in battery
.It
UltraBay battery
.It
Built-in battery
.It
UltraBay battery
.El
.It Va dev.acpi_ibm.0.handlerevents
.Xr devd 8
events handled by
.Nm
when
.Va events
is set to 1.
Events are specified as a whitespace-separated list of event code in
hexadecimal or decimal form.
Note that the event maybe handled twice (e.g., Brightness up/down) if ACPI BIOS
already handled the event.
.El
.Pp
Defaults for these sysctls can be set in
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/led/thinklight"
.It Pa /dev/led/thinklight
ThinkLight
.Xr led 4
device node
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following can be added to
.Xr devd.conf 5
in order to pass button events to a
.Pa /usr/local/sbin/acpi_oem_exec.sh
script:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
notify 10 {
        match "system"          "ACPI";
        match "subsystem"       "IBM";
        action "/usr/local/sbin/acpi_oem_exec.sh $notify ibm";
};
.Ed
.Pp
A possible
.Pa /usr/local/sbin/acpi_oem_exec.sh
script might look like:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#!/bin/sh
#
if [ "$1" = "" -o "$2" = "" ]
then
        echo "usage: $0 notify oem_name"
        exit 1
fi
NOTIFY=`echo $1`
LOGGER="logger"
CALC="bc"
BC_PRECOMMANDS="scale=2"
ECHO="echo"
CUT="cut"
MAX_LCD_BRIGHTNESS=7
MAX_VOLUME=14
OEM=$2
DISPLAY_PIPE=/tmp/acpi_${OEM}_display

case ${NOTIFY} in
        0x05)
                LEVEL=`sysctl -n dev.acpi_${OEM}.0.bluetooth`
                if [ "$LEVEL" = "1" ]
                then
                        sysctl dev.acpi_${OEM}.0.bluetooth=0
                        MESSAGE="bluetooth disabled"
                else
                        sysctl dev.acpi_${OEM}.0.bluetooth=1
                        MESSAGE="bluetooth enabled"
                fi
                ;;
        0x10|0x11)
                LEVEL=`sysctl -n dev.acpi_${OEM}.0.lcd_brightness`
                PERCENT=`${ECHO} "${BC_PRECOMMANDS} ; \\
                         ${LEVEL} / ${MAX_LCD_BRIGHTNESS} * 100" |\\
                         ${CALC} | ${CUT} -d . -f 1`
                MESSAGE="brightness level ${PERCENT}%"
                ;;
        0x12)
                LEVEL=`sysctl -n dev.acpi_${OEM}.0.thinklight`
                if [ "$LEVEL" = "1" ]
                then
                        MESSAGE="thinklight enabled"
                else
                        MESSAGE="thinklight disabled"
                fi
                ;;
        0x15|0x16)
                LEVEL=`sysctl -n dev.acpi_${OEM}.0.volume`
                PERCENT=`${ECHO} "${BC_PRECOMMANDS} ; \\
                        ${LEVEL} / ${MAX_VOLUME} * 100" | \\
                         ${CALC} | ${CUT} -d . -f 1`
                MESSAGE="volume level ${PERCENT}%"
                ;;
        0x17)
                LEVEL=`sysctl -n dev.acpi_${OEM}.0.mute`
                if [ "$LEVEL" = "1" ]
                then
                        MESSAGE="volume muted"
                else
                        MESSAGE="volume unmuted"
                fi
                ;;
	0x1b)
		LEVEL=`sysctl -n dev.acpi_ibm.0.mic_led`
		if [ $LEVEL -eq 0 ]; then
			sysctl dev.acpi_ibm.0.mic_led=1
			mixer rec 0
		fi 
		if [ $LEVEL -eq 1 ]; then 
			sysctl dev.acpi_ibm.0.mic_led=0
			mixer rec 30
		fi
		;;
        *)
                ;;
esac
${LOGGER} ${MESSAGE}
if [ -p ${DISPLAY_PIPE} ]
then
        ${ECHO} ${MESSAGE} >> ${DISPLAY_PIPE} &
fi
exit 0
.Ed
.Pp
The following example specify that event code 0x04 (Suspend to RAM),
0x10 (Brightness up) and 0x11 (Brightness down) are handled by
.Nm .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.acpi_ibm.0.handlerevents='0x04 0x10 0x11'
.Ed
.Pp
in
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.acpi_ibm.0.handlerevents=0x04\\ 0x10\\ 0x11
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr led 4 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Takanori Watanabe Aq Mt takawata@FreeBSD.org
and later mostly rewritten by
.An Markus Brueffer Aq Mt markus@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Christian Brueffer Aq Mt brueffer@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Markus Brueffer Aq Mt markus@FreeBSD.org .
