.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Philip Paeps <philip@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 8, 2010
.Dt ACPI_TOSHIBA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_toshiba
.Nd Toshiba HCI interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_toshiba"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_toshiba_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
HCI is Toshiba's
.Em "Hardware Control Interface"
which is somewhat uniform across their models.
The
.Nm
driver allows the user to manipulate HCI-controlled hardware using a number of
.Xr sysctl 8
variables.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following sysctls are currently implemented:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.acpi.toshiba.force_fan
Causes active cooling to be forcibly enabled
.Pq Ql 1
or disabled
.Pq Ql 0
regardless of the current temperature.
.It Va hw.acpi.toshiba.video_output
Sets the active display to use according to a bitwise OR of the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Li 0
No display
.It Li 1
LCD
.It Li 2
CRT
.It Li 4
TV-Out
.El
.Pp
Only some systems (i.e., the Libretto L5) support video switching via
this hardware-specific driver.
Use the
.Xr acpi_video 4
driver for generic video output support.
.It Va hw.acpi.toshiba.lcd_brightness
Makes the LCD backlight brighter or dimmer (higher values are brighter).
.It Va hw.acpi.toshiba.lcd_backlight
Turns the LCD backlight on and off.
.It Va hw.acpi.toshiba.cpu_speed
Sets the CPU speed to the specified speed.
This provides functionality similar to the
.Va hw.acpi.cpu.throttle_state
variable.
Higher sysctl values mean lower CPU speeds.
.El
.Pp
Defaults for these variables can be set in
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
which is parsed at boot-time.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
The
.Va hw.acpi.toshiba.enable_fn_keys
tunable enables or disables the function keys on the keyboard.
Function keys are enabled by default.
.Pp
This behaviour can be changed at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt or in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr acpi_video 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Hiroyuki Aizu Aq Mt aizu@navi.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Philip Paeps Aq Mt philip@FreeBSD.org .
