.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Michael Gmelin
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 22, 2011
.Dt ACPI_WMI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_wmi
.Nd "ACPI to WMI mapping driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_wmi"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_wmi_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides an interface for vendor specific WMI implementations
(e.g. HP and Acer laptops).
It creates /dev/wmistat%d, which can be read to get
information about GUIDs found in the system.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/wmistat%d -compact
.It Pa /dev/wmistat%d
WMI status device.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
# cat /dev/wmistat0
GUID                                  INST EXPE METH STR EVENT OID
{5FB7F034-2C63-45E9-BE91-3D44E2C707E4}   1 NO   WMAA NO  NO    AA
{95F24279-4D7B-4334-9387-ACCDC67EF61C}   1 NO   NO   NO  0x80+ -
{2B814318-4BE8-4707-9D84-A190A859B5D0}   1 NO   NO   NO  0xA0  -
{05901221-D566-11D1-B2F0-00A0C9062910}   1 NO   NO   NO  NO    AB
{1F4C91EB-DC5C-460B-951D-C7CB9B4B8D5E}   1 NO   WMBA NO  NO    BA
{2D114B49-2DFB-4130-B8FE-4A3C09E75133}  57 NO   NO   NO  NO    BC
{988D08E3-68F4-4C35-AF3E-6A1B8106F83C}  20 NO   NO   NO  NO    BD
{14EA9746-CE1F-4098-A0E0-7045CB4DA745}   1 NO   NO   NO  NO    BE
{322F2028-0F84-4901-988E-015176049E2D}   2 NO   NO   NO  NO    BF
{8232DE3D-663D-4327-A8F4-E293ADB9BF05}   0 NO   NO   NO  NO    BG
{8F1F6436-9F42-42C8-BADC-0E9424F20C9A}   0 NO   NO   NO  NO    BH
{8F1F6435-9F42-42C8-BADC-0E9424F20C9A}   0 NO   NO   NO  NO    BI
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
.Pp
Work has been inspired by the Linux acpi-wmi driver written by Carlos Corbacho.
.Pp
See http://www.microsoft.com/whdc/system/pnppwr/wmi/wmi-acpi.mspx for
the specification of ACPI-WMI.
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
