.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 2, 2012
.Dt ACPI_ASUS_WMI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_asus_wmi
.Nd Asus Laptop WMI Extras
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_asus_wmi"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_asus_wmi_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the extra WMI-controlled gadgets, such as hotkeys
and leds, found on Asus laptops.
It allows one to use the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface to manipulate the brightness of the LCD panel and keyboard backlight,
power on/off different internal components, such as WiFi, Bluetooth, camera,
cardreader, etc, read some sensors.
Hotkey events are passed to
.Xr devd 8
for easy handling in userspace with the default configuration in
.Pa /etc/devd/asus.conf .
Some hotkey events, such as keyboard backlight and touchpad control, are
handled inside the driver.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following sysctls are currently implemented:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.acpi_asus_wmi.0.handle_keys
Specifies whether driver should handle some harwdare keys, such as keyboard
backlight, internally.
.El
.Pp
Number of other variables under the same sysctl branch are model-specific.
.Pp
Defaults for these variables can be set in
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
which is parsed at boot-time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr acpi_asus 4 ,
.Xr acpi_video 4 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Alexander Motin Aq Mt mav@FreeBSD.org
