.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Philip Paeps <philip@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 8, 2010
.Dt ACPI_ASUS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_asus
.Nd Asus Laptop Extras
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_asus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_asus_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the extra ACPI-controlled gadgets, such as hotkeys
and leds, found on recent Asus (and Medion) laptops.
It allows one to use the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface to manipulate the brightness of the LCD panel and the display output
state.
Hotkey events are passed to
.Xr devd 8
for easy handling in userspace with the default configuration in
.Pa /etc/devd/asus.conf .
.Pp
Currently, the following Asus laptops are fully supported:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
xxN
.It
A1x
.It
A2x
.It
A3N
.It
A4D
.It
A6VM
.It
D1x
.It
J1x
.It
L2B
.It
L2D
.It
L2E
.It
L3C
.It
L3D
.It
L3H
.It
L4E
.It
L4R
.It
L5x
.It
L8x
.It
M1A
.It
M2E
.It
M6N
.It
M6R
.It
S1x
.It
S2x
.It
V6V
.It
W5A
.It
Eee PC
.El
.Pp
Additionally,
.Nm
also supports the Asus-compatible
.Em ATK0100
interface found in
.Em Samsung P30/P35
laptops.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following sysctls are currently implemented:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.acpi.asus.lcd_brightness
Makes the LCD backlight brighter or dimmer (higher values are brighter).
.It Va hw.acpi.asus.lcd_backlight
Turns the LCD backlight on or off.
.It Va hw.acpi.asus.video_output
Sets the active display to use according to a bitwise OR of the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Li 0
No display
.It Li 1
LCD
.It Li 2
CRT
.It Li 4
TV-Out
.El
.Pp
Some models also support video switching via the generic
.Xr acpi_video 4
driver.
Most models do not, however.
.El
.Pp
Defaults for these variables can be set in
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
which is parsed at boot-time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr acpi_asus_wmi 4 ,
.Xr acpi_video 4 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Rs
.%T The acpi4asus Project
.%U http://sourceforge.net/projects/acpi4asus/
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Philip Paeps Aq Mt philip@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
Inspiration came from the
.Em acpi4asus project
started by
.An Julien Lerouge
which maintains a driver implementing this
functionality in the
.Tn Linux
kernel.
