.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Takanori Watanabe
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 8, 2013
.Dt ACPI_RAPIDSTART 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_rapidstart
.Nd "Intel rapid start technology ACPI driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_rapidstart"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_rapidstart_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Intel Rapid Start technology ACPI device interface.
Note that this is only for the ACPI device interface.
This has _CID PNP0C02 so it should be loaded at boot time to avoid attaching
to the acpi_sysresource driver.
.Sh SYSCTLS
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
nodes are currently implemented:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.acpi_rapidstart.0.ffs
Rapid start flag.
It is a bitwise OR of the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent-two -compact
.It Li 1
Enter Fast Flash Standby in RTC wake.
.It Li 2
Enter Fast Flash Standby in Critical Battery Wake enable
.El
.It Va dev.acpi_rapidstart.0.ftv
Fast Flash Standby timer value in minutes.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Takanori Watanabe Aq Mt takawata@FreeBSD.org .
