.\"	$OpenBSD: acpidock.4,v 1.5 2013/07/16 16:05:48 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Michael Knudsen <mk@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt ACPIDOCK 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpidock
.Nd ACPI docking station
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "acpidock* at acpi?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports ACPI docking stations.
Docking stations are units that, for example, laptops may attach to in
order to expose a number of additional hardware devices.
The
.Nm
driver handles docking and undocking machines to gracefully detach
external devices.
.Pp
When docking and undocking, an event is passed to the driver which is
then reacted upon.
For undocking, this event is usually triggered by pressing a button on
the docking station or using a special keyboard combination; for docking,
the machine usually just has to be inserted.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver sets up a sensor that indicates docking state that can be
used with
.Xr sensorsd 8
to perform events when docking or undocking.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Michael Knudsen Aq Mt mk@openbsd.org .
