.\"	$OpenBSD: acpisurface.4,v 1.2 2018/07/01 05:47:16 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Mike Larkin <mlarkin@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 1 2018 $
.Dt ACPISURFACE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpisurface
.Nd Microsoft Surface Book ACPI support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "acpisurface* at acpi?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides ACPI support for Microsoft Surface Book laptops.
It responds to various button presses such as volume up/down and power
buttons, all of which are located on the top of the tablet/detachable display.
It does not provide support for the hotkeys in the keyboard/base unit.
.Pp
Volume up/down button presses are routed to the master system mixer via the
.Xr wscons 4
subsystem.
Power button presses result in a soft power off request being queued by the
.Xr acpi 4
subsystem.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 6.4 .
