.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Mark Santcroos <marks@ripe.net>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 8, 2004
.Dt ACPI_VIDEO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_video
.Nd ACPI Video Extensions driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device acpi_video"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver uses the ACPI Video Extensions to control display switching and
backlight brightness.
The availability of the
.Xr sysctl 8
variables depends on the functions offered by the host's ACPI implementation.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following sysctls are currently implemented,
where
.Aq Ar device
is
.Va crt , lcd ,
or
.Va tv :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.acpi.video. Ns Ao Ar device Ac Ns Va .active
Current state of the output device.
.It Va hw.acpi.video. Ns Ao Ar device Ac Ns Va .levels
List of supported brightness levels.
.It Va hw.acpi.video. Ns Ao Ar device Ac Ns Va .brightness
Current brightness level of the device.
.It Va hw.acpi.video. Ns Ao Ar device Ac Ns Va .fullpower
Preset brightness level to be used in full power mode.
.It Va hw.acpi.video. Ns Ao Ar device Ac Ns Va .economy
Preset brightness level to be used in economy mode.
.El
.Pp
Defaults for these variables can be set in
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
which is parsed at boot-time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Taku YAMAMOTO Aq Mt taku@cent.saitama-u.ac.jp .
This manual page was written by
.An Mark Santcroos Aq Mt marks@ripe.net .
.Sh BUGS
Some systems only perform output switching via SMM even though they export
the proper information via ACPI.
On such systems, the proper hotkeys or OEM driver (for example,
.Xr acpi_toshiba 4 )
must be used instead.
