.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Takanori Watanabe.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 17, 2007
.Dt ACPI_THERMAL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_thermal
.Nd ACPI thermal management subsystem
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device acpi"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides the thermal management features of the ACPI module.
This driver has a
.Xr sysctl 8
interface and a
.Xr devd 8
notification interface.
The sysctls export properties of each ACPI thermal zone object.
.Pp
There can be multiple thermal zones in a system.
For example, each CPU and the enclosure could all be separate thermal
zones, each with its own setpoints and cooling devices.
Thermal zones are numbered sequentially in the order they appear in
the AML.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver also activates the active cooling system according to
each thermal zone's setpoints.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.min_runtime
Number of seconds to continue active cooling once started.
A new active cooling level will not be selected until this interval expires.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.polling_rate
Number of seconds between polling the current temperature.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.user_override
If set to 1, allow user override of various setpoints (below).
The original values for these settings are obtained from the BIOS and
system overheating and possible damage could occur if changed.
Default is 0 (no override).
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d.active
Current active cooling system state.
If this is non-negative, the appropriate _AC%d object is running.
Set this value to the desired active cooling level to force
the corresponding fan object to the appropriate level.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d.passive_cooling
If set to 1, passive cooling is enabled.
It does cooling without fans using
.Xr cpufreq 4
as the mechanism for controlling CPU speed.
Default is enabled for tz0 where it is available.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d.thermal_flags
Current thermal zone status.
These are bit-masked values.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d.temperature
Current temperature for this zone.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d._PSV
Temperature to start passive cooling by throttling down CPU, etc.
This value can be overridden by the user.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d._HOT
Temperature to start critical suspend to disk (S4).
This value can be overridden by the user.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d._CRT
Temperature to start critical shutdown (S5).
This value can be overridden by the user.
.It Va hw.acpi.thermal.tz%d._ACx
Temperatures at which to switch to the corresponding active cooling
level.
The lower the _ACx value, the higher the cooling power.
.El
.Pp
All temperatures are printed in Celsius.
Values can be set in Celsius (by providing a trailing
.Qq C )
or Kelvin (by leaving off any trailing letter).
When setting a value by
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
do not specify a trailing decimal (i.e., 90C instead of 90.0C).
.Sh NOTIFIES
Notifies are passed to userland via
.Xr devd 8 .
See
.Pa /etc/devd.conf
and
.Xr devd.conf 5
for examples.
The
.Nm
driver sends events with the following attributes:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "subsystem" -compact
.It system
.Li ACPI
.It subsystem
.Li Thermal
.It type
The fully qualified thermal zone object path as in the ASL.
.It notify
An integer designating the event:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Li 0x80
Current temperature has changed.
.It Li 0x81
One or more trip points (_ACx, _PSV) have changed.
.It Li 0x82
One or more device lists (_ALx, _PSL, _TZD) have changed.
.It Li 0xcc
Non-standard notify that the system will shutdown if the temperature
stays above _CRT or _HOT for one more poll cycle.
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr cpufreq 4 ,
.Xr acpidump 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An Michael Smith
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Takanori Watanabe .
