.\"	$OpenBSD: adv.4,v 1.28 2015/01/15 20:37:36 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998, Jason Downs.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 15 2015 $
.Dt ADV 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm adv , adw
.Nd AdvanSys PCI SCSI interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "adv* at pci?"
.Cd "adw* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm adv
and
.Nm adw
drivers support most AdvanSys PCI SCSI host adapters, as shown in this
table:
.Bl -column "ABP-960U (2)" "ASB3940U2W-00" -offset indent
.It Sy adv Ta Sy adw
.It "ABP-920" Ta ABP-940UW
.It "ABP-930 (1)" Ta ABP-940UWD
.It "ABP-930U" Ta ABP-970UW
.It "ABP-930UA" Ta ASB-3940UW-00
.It "ABP-940" Ta ASB-3940U2W-00
.It "ABP-940U" Ta ASB-3950U160
.It "ABP-940UA" Ta ""
.It "ABP-950" Ta ""
.It "ABP-960 (2)" Ta ""
.It "ABP-960U (2)" Ta ""
.It "ABP-970" Ta ""
.It "ABP-970U" Ta ""
.It "ABP-980" Ta ""
.It "ABP-980U" Ta ""
.El
.Pp
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
This board has been sold by SIIG as the Fast SCSI Pro PCI.
.It
This board has been sold by Iomega as a Jaz Jet PCI adapter.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm adw
driver will log some host adapter errors with general messages such as
.Bd -literal -offset indent
adw0:0:0: host adapter error 0x12. See adw(4).
adw0:0:0: host adapter error 0x12, resetting bus. See adw(4).
.Ed
.Pp
Some further information on the meaning of such errors can be obtained
from the following table derived from the source code provided by
ConnectCom.
.Bl -column "Error" "QHSTA_M_SCSI_BUS_RESET_UNSOL" "Comment"
.It Em "Error" Ta Em "Define Name" Ta Em "Comment"
.It 0x12 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_XFR_OFLW Ta "SXFR_STATUS Transfer Overflow"
.It 0x13 Ta QHSTA_M_UNEXPECTED_BUS_FREE Ta ""
.It 0x15 Ta QHSTA_M_QUEUE_ABORTED Ta ""
.It 0x16 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_SDMA_ERR Ta "SXFR_STATUS SCSI DMA Error"
.It 0x17 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_SXFR_PERR Ta "SXFR_STATUS SCSI Bus Parity Error"
.It 0x18 Ta QHSTA_M_RDMA_PERR Ta "RISC PCI DMA parity error"
.It 0x19 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_OFF_UFLW Ta "SXFR_STATUS Offset Underflow"
.It 0x20 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_OFF_OFLW Ta "SXFR_STATUS Offset Overflow"
.It 0x21 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_WD_TMO Ta "SXFR_STATUS Watchdog Timeout"
.It 0x22 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_DESELECTED Ta "SXFR_STATUS Deselected"
.It 0x24 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_XFR_PH_ERR Ta "SXFR_STATUS Transfer Phase Error"
.It 0x25 Ta QHSTA_M_SXFR_UNKNOWN_ERROR Ta "SXFR_STATUS Unknown Error"
.It 0x30 Ta QHSTA_M_SCSI_BUS_RESET Ta "Request aborted from SBR"
.It 0x31 Ta QHSTA_M_SCSI_BUS_RESET_UNSOL Ta "Request aborted from unsolicited SBR"
.It 0x32 Ta QHSTA_M_BUS_DEVICE_RESET Ta "Request aborted from BDR"
.It 0x35 Ta QHSTA_M_DIRECTION_ERR Ta "Data Phase mismatch"
.It 0x36 Ta QHSTA_M_DIRECTION_ERR_HUNG Ta "Data Phase mismatch and bus hang"
.It 0x41 Ta QHSTA_M_WTM_TIMEOUT Ta ""
.It 0x42 Ta QHSTA_M_BAD_CMPL_STATUS_IN Ta ""
.It 0x43 Ta QHSTA_M_NO_AUTO_REQ_SENSE Ta ""
.It 0x44 Ta QHSTA_M_AUTO_REQ_SENSE_FAIL Ta ""
.It 0x45 Ta QHSTA_M_INVALID_DEVICE Ta "Bad target ID"
.It 0x46 Ta QHSTA_M_FROZEN_TIDQ Ta "TID Queue frozen"
.It 0x47 Ta QHSTA_M_SGBACKUP_ERROR Ta "Scatter-Gather backup error"
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4 ,
.Xr uk 4
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm adv
and
.Nm adw
drivers were originally written by
.An Baldassare Dante Profeta
for
.Nx ,
based on Linux drivers written by Advanced System Products,
Inc., which is now ConnectCom Solutions, Inc.
