.\"	$OpenBSD: aic.4,v 1.8 2012/08/14 01:08:19 dlg Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: aic.4,v 1.5 1998/06/07 09:08:45 enami Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Jason R. Thorpe.  All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 James A. Jegers
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 14 2012 $
.Dt AIC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aic
.Nd Adaptec AIC-6260 and AIC-6360 SCSI interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "aic0 at isa? port 0x340 irq 11"
.Cd "aic* at isapnp?"
.Cd "aic* at pcmcia?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn Adaptec
AIC-6260 and AIC-6360
.Tn SCSI
controller chips.
.Pp
The
.Tn ISA
attachment of the
.Nm
driver supports the
.Tn Adaptec
152x, the
.Tn "Creative Labs"
SoundBlaster
.Tn SCSI
host adapter, and compatibles.
Many
.Tn ISA
cards that use this chip do not have boot ROMs, and therefore cannot
be used to connect the boot device.
.Pp
The
.Tn "ISA Plug-and-Play"
attachment of the
.Nm
driver supports the
.Tn Adaptec
AHA-1520B host adapter.
.Pp
The
.Tn PCMCIA
attachment of the
.Nm
driver supports the
.Tn Adaptec
APA-14[56]0.
These
.Tn SCSI
host adapters do not include boot ROMs and therefore cannot be used
to connect the boot device.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr isapnp 4 ,
.Xr pcmcia 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4 ,
.Xr uk 4
