.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Peter Philipp
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Colin Wood
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Colin Wood
.\"      for the NetBSD Project.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$OpenBSD: akbd.4,v 1.6 2022/02/20 15:21:15 jsg Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: adb.4,v 1.1 1997/07/18 02:13:42 ender Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 20 2022 $
.Dt AKBD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm akbd
.Nd Apple Keyboard Device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "akbd* at adb?"
.Cd "wskbd* at akbd? mux 1"
.Cd "option AKBD_LAYOUT=XXX"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver supports ADB keyboards within the
.Xr wscons 4
console framework.
It doesn't provide direct device driver entry points but makes its
functions available via the internal
.Xr wskbd 4
interface.
.Pp
The following is a partial list of supported
.Tn AKBD
devices:
.Bd -filled -offset indent
.Bl -item -compact
.It
Apple Standard Keyboard
.It
Apple Extended Keyboard
.It
Apple Keyboard II
.It
Apple PowerBook Keyboard
.It
Apple Adjustable Keyboard
.It
Apple PowerBook extended Keyboard
.It
Apple PowerBook G3 Keyboard
.It
Apple PowerBook G4 Keyboard
.It
Apple iBook Keyboard
.It
.El
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports a number of different key mappings which
can be chosen from with the kernel option
.Dq AKBD_LAYOUT
at compile time or with the utility
.Xr wsconsctl 8
(variable:
.Dq keyboard.encoding )
at runtime.
Other mappings can be used if the whole keymap is replaced by means of
.Xr wsconsctl 8 .
The built-in mappings are at this time:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It KB_DE
.Pq de
German with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_ES
.Pq es
Spanish.
.It KB_FR
.Pq fr
French.
.It KB_JP
.Pq jp
Japanese.
.It KB_PT
.Pq pt
Portuguese.
.It KB_SF
.Pq sf
Swiss French with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_SG
.Pq sg
Swiss German with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_SV
.Pq sv
Swedish with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_UK
.Pq uk
British.
.It KB_US
.Pq us
English/US keyboard mapping (default).
.El
.Pp
The KB_DE, KB_FR, KB_SG and KB_SV mappings can be used in the KB_NODEAD
.Pq .nodead
variant.
This switches off the
.Dq dead accents .
.Sh EXAMPLES
To set a German keyboard layout without
.Dq dead accents ,
use
.Ic wsconsctl keyboard.encoding=de.nodead .
To set it at kernel build time, add
the following to the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
option AKBD_LAYOUT="KB_DE|KB_NODEAD"
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr adb 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ukbd 4 ,
.Xr wskbd 4 ,
.Xr wsconsctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
interface first appeared in
.Nx 0.9 .
It has been under development ever since.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An Bradley A. Grantham
wrote the original
.Nm
driver, including the MRG support.
The hardware direct interface was written by
.An John P. Wittkoski .
.Sh BUGS
The list of built-in mappings doesn't follow any logic.
It grew as people submitted what they needed.
