.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Pyun YongHyeon
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 12, 2008
.Dt ALE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ale
.Nd Atheros AR8121/AR8113/AR8114 Gigabit/Fast Ethernet driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device ale"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ale_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for Atheros AR8121 PCI Express
Gigabit Ethernet controllers and Atheros AR8113/AR8114 PCI
Express Fast Ethernet controllers.
.Pp
All LOMs supported by the
.Nm
driver have TCP/UDP/IP checksum offload for both receive and transmit,
TCP segmentation offload (TSO), hardware VLAN tag stripping/insertion
features, Wake On Lan (WOL) and an interrupt coalescing/moderation
mechanism as well as a 64-bit multicast hash filter.
.Pp
The AR8121 also supports Jumbo Frames (up to 8132 bytes), which can
be configured via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit Jumbo Frames.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.It Cm 1000baseTX
Set 1000baseTX operation over twisted pair.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for the following Ethernet controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Atheros AR8113 PCI Express Fast Ethernet controller
.It
Atheros AR8114 PCI Express Fast Ethernet controller
.It
Atheros AR8121 PCI Express Gigabit Ethernet controller
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va hw.ale.msi_disable
This tunable disables MSI support on the Ethernet hardware.
The default value is 0.
.It Va hw.ale.msix_disable
This tunable disables MSI-X support on the Ethernet hardware.
The default value is 0.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va dev.ale.%d.int_rx_mod
Maximum amount of time to delay receive interrupt processing in
units of 1us.
The accepted range is 0 to 130000, the default is 30(30us).
Value 0 completely disables the interrupt moderation.
.It Va dev.ale.%d.int_tx_mod
Maximum amount of time to delay transmit interrupt processing in
units of 1us.
The accepted range is 0 to 130000, the default is 1000(1ms).
Value 0 completely disables the interrupt moderation.
.It Va dev.ale.%d.process_limit
Maximum amount of Rx frames to be processed in the event loop before
rescheduling a taskqueue.
The accepted range is 32 to 255, the default value is 128 events.
The interface does not need to be brought down and up again before
a change takes effect.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Pyun YongHyeon Aq Mt yongari@FreeBSD.org .
It first appeared in
.Fx 7.1 .
