.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract (FA8750-10-C-0237)
.\" ("CTSRD"), as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2012
.Dt ALTERA_SDCARD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm altera_sdcard
.Nd driver for the Altera University Program Secure Data Card IP Core
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device altera_sdcard"
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.altera_sdcardc.0.at="nexus0"
.Cd hint.altera_sdcardc.0.maddr=0x7f008000
.Cd hint.altera_sdcardc.0.msize=0x400
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for the Altera University Program Secure Data
Card (SD Card) IP Core device.
A controller device,
.Li altera_sdcardcX ,
will be attached during boot.
Inserted disks are presented as
.Xr disk 9
devices,
.Li altera_sdcardX ,
corresponding to the controller number.
.Sh HARDWARE
The current version of the
.Nm
driver supports the SD Card IP core as described in the August 2011 version of
Altera's documentation.
The core supports only cards up to 2G (CSD 0); larger cards, or cards using
newer CSD versions, will not be detected.
The IP core has two key limitations: a lack of interrupt support, requiring
timer-driven polling to detect I/O completion, and support for only single
512-byte block read and write operations at a time.
The combined effect of those two limits is that the system clock rate,
.Dv HZ ,
must be set to at least 200 in order to accomplish the maximum 100KB/s data
rate supported by the IP core.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr disk 9
.Rs
.%T Altera University Program Secure Data Card IP Core
.%D August 2011
.%I Altera Corporation - University Program
.%U ftp://ftp.altera.com/up/pub/Altera_Material/11.0/University_Program_IP_Cores/Memory/SD_Card_Interface_for_SoPC_Builder.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver and this manual page were
developed by SRI International and the University of Cambridge Computer
Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract
.Pq FA8750-10-C-0237
.Pq Do CTSRD Dc ,
as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
This device driver was written by
.An Robert N. M. Watson .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
contains a number of work-arounds for IP core bugs.
Perhaps most critically,
.Nm
ignores the CRC error bit returned in the RR1 register, which appears to be
unexpectedly set by the IP core.
.Pp
.Nm
uses fixed polling intervals are used for card insertion/removal and
I/O completion detection; an adaptive strategy might improve performance by
reducing the latency to detecting completed I/O.
However, in our experiments, using polling rates greater than 200 times a
second did not improve performance.
.Pp
.Nm
supports only a
.Li nexus
bus attachment, which is appropriate for system-on-chip busses such as
Altera's Avalon bus.
If the IP core is configured off of another bus type, then additional bus
attachments will be required.
