.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2014 SRI International
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract (FA8750-10-C-0237)
.\" ("CTSRD"), as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 21, 2014
.Dt ALTERA_ATSE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm atse
.Nd driver for the Altera Triple-Speed Ethernet MegaCore
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device atse"
.Cd "options ATSE_CFI_HACK"
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.atse.0.at="nexus0"
.Cd hint.atse.0.maddr=0x7f007000
.Cd hint.atse.0.msize=0x540
.Cd hint.atse.0.rc_irq=1
.Cd hint.atse.0.rx_maddr=0x7f007500
.Cd hint.atse.0.rx_msize=0x8
.Cd hint.atse.0.rxc_maddr=0x7f007520
.Cd hint.atse.0.rxc_msize=0x20
.Cd hint.atse.0.tx_irq=2
.Cd hint.atse.0.tx_maddr=0x7f007400
.Cd hint.atse.0.tx_msize=0x8
.Cd hint.atse.0.txc_maddr=0x7f007420
.Cd hint.atse.0.txc_msize=0x20
.Cd hint.e1000phy.0.at="miibus0"
.Cd hint.e1000phy.0.phyno=0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for the Altera Triple-Speed Ethernet
MegaCore.
.Sh HARDWARE
The current version of the
.Nm
driver supports the Ethernet MegaCore as described in version 11.1 of
Altera's documentation when the device is configured with internal FIFOs.
.Sh MAC SELECTION
The default MAC address for each
.Nm
interface is derived from a value stored in
.Xr cfi 4
flash.
The value is managed by the
.Xr atsectl 8
utility.
.Pp
Only a single MAC address may be stored in flash.
If the address begins with the Altera prefix 00:07:ed and ends in 00 then
up to 16 addresses will be derived from it by adding the unit number of
the interface to the stored address.
For other prefixes, the address will be assigned to atse0 and random
addresses will be used for other interfaces.
If the stored address is invalid, for example all zero's, multicast, or the
default address shipped on all DE4 boards (00:07:ed:ff:ed:15) then a random
address is generated when the device is attached.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T Triple-Speed Ethernet MegaCore Function User Guide
.%D November 2011
.%I Altera Corporation
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver and this manual page were
developed by SRI International and the University of Cambridge Computer
Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract
.Pq FA8750-10-C-0237
.Pq Do CTSRD Dc ,
as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
This device driver was written by
.An Bjoern A. Zeeb .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver only supports a single configuration of the MegaCore as installed
on the Terasic Technologies Altera DE4 Development and Education Board.
.Pp
Only gigabit Ethernet speeds are currently supported.
