.\" $OpenBSD: aq.4,v 1.4 2022/03/31 21:43:38 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Mike Larkin <mlarkin@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 31 2022 $
.Dt AQ 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aq
.Nd Aquantia AQC1xx 1Gb/2.5Gb/5Gb/10Gb PCIe Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "aq* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Aquantia AQC1xx family of Ethernet adapters.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width autoselect -offset indent
.It autoselect
Enables auto-negotiation for speed and duplex.
.It 100baseTX Cm mediaopt No full-duplex
Sets 100Mbps operation.
.It 1000baseT
Sets 1000Mbps operation.
.It 2500baseT
Sets 2.5Gbps operation.
.It 5000baseT
Sets 5Gbps operation.
.It 10GbaseT
Sets 10Gbps operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mike Larkin Aq Mt mlarkin@openbsd.org
and
.An Jonathan Matthew Aq Mt jmatthew@openbsd.org .
.Sh BUGS
This driver only supports devices using Aquantia firmware version 2.
