.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Scott Long
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 8, 2017
.Dt ARCMSR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm arcmsr
.Nd Areca RAID Controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device da"
.Cd "device arcmsr"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
arcmsr_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Areca ARC-11xx, ARC-12xx, ARC-13xx,
ARC-16xx and ARC-18xx series of SAS and SATA RAID controllers.
These controllers feature RAID-0, 1, 3, 5, 6, and 10 and
JBOD acceleration for up to 16 SATA drives.
RAID level and stripe level
migration, online capacity expansion, hot insertion/removal, automatic failover
and rebuild, and SMART are also supported.
Access to the arrays is provided
via the SCSI CAM
.Pa /dev/da?
device nodes.
A management interface is also present via the
.Pa /dev/arcmsr?
device node.
Management tools for i386 and amd64 are available from Areca.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
ARC-1110
.It
ARC-1120
.It
ARC-1130
.It
ARC-1160
.It
ARC-1170
.It
ARC-1110ML
.It
ARC-1120ML
.It
ARC-1130ML
.It
ARC-1160ML
.It
ARC-1200
.It
ARC-1201
.It
ARC-1203
.It
ARC-1210
.It
ARC-1212
.It
ARC-1213
.It
ARC-1214
.It
ARC-1216
.It
ARC-1220
.It
ARC-1222
.It
ARC-1223
.It
ARC-1224
.It
ARC-1226
.It
ARC-1230
.It
ARC-1231
.It
ARC-1260
.It
ARC-1261
.It
ARC-1270
.It
ARC-1280
.It
ARC-1210ML
.It
ARC-1220ML
.It
ARC-1231ML
.It
ARC-1261ML
.It
ARC-1280ML
.It
ARC-1380
.It
ARC-1381
.It
ARC-1680
.It
ARC-1681
.It
ARC-1880
.It
ARC-1882
.It
ARC-1883
.It
ARC-1884
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/arcmsr?" -compact
.It Pa /dev/da?
Array block device
.It Pa /dev/arcmsr?
Management interface
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr scbus 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.4 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The driver was written by
.An Erich Chen Aq Mt erich@areca.com.tw .
.Sh BUGS
The driver has been tested on i386 and amd64.
It likely requires additional
work to function on big-endian architectures.
