.\"	$OpenBSD: arcofi.4,v 1.8 2020/04/22 05:37:00 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Miodrag Vallat.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: April 22 2020 $
.Dt ARCOFI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm arcofi
.Nd Siemens PSB2160 audio codec
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "arcofi* at gsc?"
.Cd "audio*  at arcofi?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the HP
.Dq Audio1
audio devices, based upon the Siemens PSB2160
.Dq ARCOFI
codec, to implement the audio device interface described in
.Xr audio 4 .
.Pp
This device is found onboard HP 9000 workstations models 425e, 705 and 710.
.Pp
The
.Nm
is limited to a mono, 8000 KHz sound, either with 8-bit phone-quality mu-law or
a-law samples, or 16-bit signed linear samples in big-endian byte order.
.Ss AUDIOCTL SETTINGS
The following encodings are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width AUDIO_ENCODING_SLINEAR_BE -offset indent -compact
.It Li AUDIO_ENCODING_ULAW
.It Li AUDIO_ENCODING_ALAW
.It Li AUDIO_ENCODING_SLINEAR_BE
Natively supported.
.Pp
.It Li AUDIO_ENCODING_SLINEAR
Software converted to
.Li AUDIO_ENCODING_ULAW
encoding.
.Pp
.It Li AUDIO_ENCODING_SLINEAR_LE
.It Li AUDIO_ENCODING_ULINEAR_LE
.It Li AUDIO_ENCODING_ULINEAR_BE
Software converted to
.Li AUDIO_ENCODING_SLINEAR_BE
encoding.
.El
.Ss MIXERCTL SETTINGS
The
.Nm
has three audio ports:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "outputs.lineXXX" -offset indent -compact
.It Cm inputs.line
The
.Sq line in
jack connector.
.It Cm outputs.line
The
.Sq line out
jack connector.
.It Cm outputs.spkr
The built-in speaker.
.El
.Pp
Each port has a volume control, and can be muted.
.Pp
The
.Cm outputs.line
and
.Cm outputs.spkr
volume settings are tied to the same hardware setting.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr gsc 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr audioctl 8 ,
.Xr mixerctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
.Ox
support for
.Nm
first appeared in
.Ox 5.1 .
