.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 23, 2015
.Dt ATA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ata
.Nd generic ATA/SATA controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device ata"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as set of modules at boot time,
place some of the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ata_load="YES"

atacard_load="YES"
ataisa_load="YES"
atapci_load="YES"

ataacard_load="YES"
ataacerlabs_load="YES"
ataamd_load="YES"
ataati_load="YES"
atacenatek_load="YES"
atacypress_load="YES"
atacyrix_load="YES"
atahighpoint_load="YES"
ataintel_load="YES"
ataite_load="YES"
atajmicron_load="YES"
atamarvell_load="YES"
atamicron_load="YES"
atanational_load="YES"
atanetcell_load="YES"
atanvidia_load="YES"
atapromise_load="YES"
ataserverworks_load="YES"
atasiliconimage_load="YES"
atasis_load="YES"
atavia_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
The first line is for the common hardware independent code, and is a
prerequisite for the other modules.
The next three lines are generic bus-specific drivers.
The rest are vendor-specific PCI drivers.
.Pp
The following tunables are settable from the
.Xr loader 8 :
.Bl -ohang
.It Va hw.ata.ata_dma_check_80pin
set to 0 to disable the 80pin cable check (the default is 1, check the cable).
.It Va hint.atapci.X.msi
set to 1 to allow Message Signalled Interrupts (MSI) to be used by the
specified PCI ATA controller, if supported.
.It Va hint.ata.X.devX.mode
limits the initial ATA mode for the specified device on the specified channel.
.It Va hint.ata.X.mode
limits the initial ATA mode for every device on the specified channel.
.It Va hint.ata.X.pm_level
controls SATA interface Power Management for the specified channel,
allowing some power savings at the cost of additional command latency.
Possible values:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 4n -offset indent -compact
.It 0
Interface Power Management is disabled.
This is the default value.
.It 1
The device is allowed to initiate a PM state change; the host is passive.
.El
.It Va hint.ata. Ns Ar X Ns Va .dev Ns Ar X Ns Va .sata_rev
limits the initial SATA revision (speed) for the specified device
on the specified channel.
Values 1, 2 and 3 are respectively 1.5, 3 and 6Gbps.
.It Va hint.ata. Ns Ar X Ns Va .sata_rev
Same, but for every device on the specified channel.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver gives the
.Xr CAM 4
subsystem access to the ATA (IDE) and SATA ports
of many generic controllers.
Depending on the controller, each PATA (IDE)
port or each one or two SATA ports are
represented to CAM as a separate bus with one or two targets.
Most of the bus-management details are handled by the ATA/SATA-specific
transport of CAM.
Connected ATA disks are handled by the ATA protocol disk peripheral driver
.Xr ada 4 .
ATAPI devices are handled by the SCSI protocol peripheral drivers
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
etc.
.Pp
This driver supports ATA, and for the most of controllers, ATAPI devices.
Command queuing and SATA port multipliers are not supported.
Device hot-plug and SATA interface power management is supported only on
some controllers.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can change the transfer mode when the system is up and running.
See the
.Cm negotiate
subcommand of
.Xr camcontrol 8 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver sets the maximum transfer mode supported by the hardware as default.
However, the
.Nm
driver sometimes warns:
.Dq Sy "DMA limited to UDMA33, non-ATA66 cable or device".
This means that
the
.Nm
driver has detected that the required 80 conductor cable is not present
or could not be detected properly,
or that one of the devices on the channel only accepts up
to UDMA2/ATA33.
The
.Va hw.ata.ata_dma_check_80pin
tunable can be set to 0 to disable this check.
.Sh HARDWARE
The currently supported ATA/SATA controller chips are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "Silicon Image:" -compact
.It Acard:
ATP850P, ATP860A, ATP860R, ATP865A, ATP865R.
.It ALI:
M5228, M5229, M5281, M5283, M5287, M5288, M5289.
.It AMD:
AMD756, AMD766, AMD768, AMD8111, CS5536.
.It ATI:
IXP200, IXP300, IXP400, IXP600, IXP700, IXP800.
.It CMD:
CMD646, CMD646U2, CMD648, CMD649.
.It Cypress:
Cypress 82C693.
.It Cyrix:
Cyrix 5530.
.It HighPoint:
HPT302, HPT366, HPT368, HPT370, HPT371, HPT372, HPT372N, HPT374.
.It Intel:
6300ESB, 31244, PIIX, PIIX3, PIIX4, ESB2, ICH, ICH0, ICH2, ICH3, ICH4, ICH5,
ICH6, ICH7, ICH8, ICH9, ICH10, SCH, PCH.
.It ITE:
IT8211F, IT8212F, IT8213F.
.It JMicron:
JMB360, JMB361, JMB363, JMB365, JMB366, JMB368.
.It Marvell
88SE6101, 88SE6102, 88SE6111, 88SE6121, 88SE6141, 88SE6145.
.It National:
SC1100.
.It NetCell:
NC3000, NC5000.
.It nVidia:
nForce, nForce2, nForce2 MCP, nForce3, nForce3 MCP, nForce3 Pro, nForce4,
MCP51, MCP55, MCP61, MCP65, MCP67, MCP73, MCP77, MCP79, MCP89.
.It Promise:
PDC20246, PDC20262, PDC20263, PDC20265, PDC20267, PDC20268, PDC20269, PDC20270,
PDC20271, PDC20275, PDC20276, PDC20277, PDC20318, PDC20319, PDC20371, PDC20375,
PDC20376, PDC20377, PDC20378, PDC20379, PDC20571, PDC20575, PDC20579, PDC20580,
PDC20617, PDC20618, PDC20619, PDC20620, PDC20621, PDC20622, PDC40518, PDC40519,
PDC40718, PDC40719.
.It ServerWorks:
HT1000, ROSB4, CSB5, CSB6, K2, Frodo4, Frodo8.
.It Silicon Image:
SiI0680, SiI3112, SiI3114, SiI3512.
.It SiS:
SIS180, SIS181, SIS182, SIS5513, SIS530, SIS540, SIS550, SIS620, SIS630,
SIS630S, SIS633, SIS635, SIS730, SIS733, SIS735, SIS745, SIS961, SIS962,
SIS963, SIS964, SIS965.
.It VIA:
VT6410, VT6420, VT6421, VT82C586, VT82C586B, VT82C596, VT82C596B, VT82C686,
VT82C686A, VT82C686B, VT8231, VT8233, VT8233A, VT8233C, VT8235, VT8237,
VT8237A, VT8237S, VT8251, CX700, VX800, VX855, VX900.
.El
.Pp
Some of above chips can be configured for AHCI mode.
In such case they are supported by
.Xr ahci 4
driver instead.
.Pp
Unknown ATA chipsets are supported in PIO modes, and if the standard
busmaster DMA registers are present and contain valid setup, DMA is
also enabled, although the max mode is limited to UDMA33, as it is
not known what the chipset can do and how to program it.
.Sh NOTES
Please remember that in order to use UDMA4/ATA66 and above modes you
.Em must
use 80 conductor cables.
Please assure that ribbon cables are no longer than 45cm.
In case of rounded ATA cables, the length depends on the
quality of the cables.
SATA cables can be up to 1m long according to the specification.
External SATA cables can be 2m long and more, but not all controllers
work well on long cables, especially at high speeds.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ada 4 ,
.Xr ahci 4 ,
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr mvs 4 ,
.Xr siis 4 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
It was turned into a
.Xr CAM 4
interface module in
.Fx 9.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Alexander Motin Aq Mt mav@FreeBSD.org
.An S\(/oren Schmidt Aq Mt sos@FreeBSD.org
