.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999
.\" Kazutaka YOKOTA <yokota@zodiac.mech.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 9, 1999
.Dt ATKBDC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm atkbdc
.Nd the AT keyboard controller interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options KBD_RESETDELAY=N"
.Cd "options KBD_MAXWAIT=N"
.Cd "options KBDIO_DEBUG=N"
.Cd "device atkbdc"
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.atkbdc.0.at="isa"
.Cd hint.atkbdc.0.port="0x060"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The keyboard controller
.Nm
provides I/O services for the AT keyboard and PS/2 mouse style
pointing devices.
This controller is required for the keyboard driver
.Nm atkbd
and the PS/2 pointing device driver
.Nm psm .
.Pp
There can be only one
.Nm
device configured in the system.
.Sh DRIVER CONFIGURATION
.Ss Kernel Configuration Options
The following kernel configuration options can be used to control the
.Nm
driver.
They may be set in the kernel configuration file
(see
.Xr config 8 ) .
.Bl -tag -width MOUSE
.It Em KBD_RESETDELAY=X , KBD_MAXWAIT=Y
The keyboard driver
.Nm atkbd
and the pointing device driver
.Nm psm
may ask the
.Nm
driver to reset these devices during the boot process.
It sometimes takes a long time before these devices respond to
the reset command.
These options control how long the
.Nm
driver should
wait before eventually giving up -- the driver will wait
.Fa X
*
.Fa Y
msecs at most.
If the drivers seem unable to detect
devices, you may want to increase these values.
The default values are
200 msec for
.Fa X
and 5
for
.Fa Y .
.It Em KBDIO_DEBUG=N
Sets the debug level to
.Fa N .
The default value is zero, which suppresses all debugging output.
.El
.\".Ss Driver Flags
.\".Sh FILES
.\".Sh EXAMPLE
.\".Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\".Sh CAVEATS
.\".Sh BUGS
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr atkbd 4 ,
.Xr psm 4 ,
.Xr config 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.1 .
It is based on the kbdio module in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The kbdio module, the
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Kazutaka Yokota Aq Mt yokota@FreeBSD.org .
