.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999
.\" Kazutaka YOKOTA <yokota@zodiac.mech.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 29, 2008
.Dt ATKBD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm atkbd
.Nd the AT keyboard interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options ATKBD_DFLT_KEYMAP"
.Cd "makeoptions ATKBD_DFLT_KEYMAP=_keymap_name_"
.Cd "options KBD_DISABLE_KEYMAP_LOAD"
.Cd "device atkbd"
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.atkbd.0.at="atkbdc"
.Cd hint.atkbd.0.irq="1"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver, together with the
.Nm atkbdc
driver, provides access to the AT 84 keyboard or the AT enhanced keyboard
which is connected to the AT keyboard controller.
.Pp
This driver is required for the console driver
.Xr syscons 4
or
.Xr vt 4 .
.Pp
There can be only one
.Nm
device defined in the kernel configuration file.
This device also requires the
.Nm atkbdc
keyboard controller to be present.
The
.Em irq
number must always be 1; there is no provision of changing the number.
.Ss Function Keys
The AT keyboard has a number of function keys.
They are numbered as follows and can be associated with strings
by the
.Xr kbdcontrol 1
command.
You can use a keyboard map file (see
.Xr kbdmap 5 )
to map them to arbitrary keys, particularly
the functions in the range from 65 to 96
which are not used by default.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "Function Key Number" -compact
.It "Function Key number"
Function Key
.It "1, 2,...12"
F1, F2,...\& F12
.It "13, 14,...24"
Shift+F1, Shift+F2,...\& Shift+F12
.It "25, 26,...36"
Ctl+F1, Ctl+F2,...\& Ctl+F12
.It "37, 38,...48"
Shift+Ctl+F1, Shift+Ctl+F2,...\& Shift+Ctl+F12
.It 49
Home and Numpad 7 (without NumLock)
.It 50
Up Arrow and Numpad 8 (without NumLock)
.It 51
Page Up and Numpad 9 (without NumLock)
.It 52
Numpad -
.It 53
Left Arrow and Numpad 4 (without NumLock)
.It 54
Numpad 5 (without NumLock)
.It 55
Right Arrow and Numpad 6 (without NumLock)
.It 56
Numpad +
.It 57
End and Numpad 1 (without NumLock)
.It 58
Down Arrow and Numpad 2 (without NumLock)
.It 59
Page Down and Numpad 3 (without NumLock)
.It 60
Ins and Numpad 0 (without NumLock)
.It 61
Del
.It 62
Left GUI Key
.It 63
Right GUI Key
.It 64
Menu
.It "65, 66,...96"
free (not used by default)
.El
.Pp
See the man page for the
.Xr kbdcontrol 1
command for how to assign a string to the function key.
.Sh DRIVER CONFIGURATION
.Ss Kernel Configuration Options
The following kernel configuration options control the
.Nm
driver.
.Bl -tag -width ATKBD_DFLT
.It Em ATKBD_DFLT_KEYMAP
This option sets the default, built-in keymap of the
.Nm
driver to the named keymap.
See
.Sx EXAMPLES
below.
.It Em KBD_DISABLE_KEYMAP_LOAD
The keymap can be modified by the
.Xr kbdcontrol 1
command.
This option will disable this feature and prevent the user from
changing key assignment.
.El
.Ss Driver Flags
The
.Nm
driver accepts the following driver flags.
They can be set either in
.Pa /boot/device.hints ,
or else from within the boot loader
(see
.Xr loader 8 ) .
.Bl -tag -width FAIL
.It bit 0 (FAIL_IF_NO_KBD)
By default the
.Nm
driver will install even if a keyboard is not actually connected to the
system.
This option prevents the driver from being installed in this situation.
.It bit 1 (NO_RESET)
When this option is given, the
.Nm
driver will not reset the keyboard when initializing it.
It may be useful for laptop computers whose function keys
have special functions and these functions are forgotten when the
keyboard is reset.
.It bit 2 (ALT_SCANCODESET)
Certain keyboards, such as those on some ThinkPad models, behave
like the old XT keyboard and require this option.
.It bit 3 (NO_PROBE_TEST)
When this option is given, the
.Nm
driver will not test the keyboard port during the probe routine.
Some machines hang during boot when this test is performed.
.El
.\".Sh FILES
.Sh EXAMPLES
The
.Nm
driver requires the keyboard controller
.Nm atkbdc .
Thus, the kernel configuration file should contain the following lines.
.Pp
.Dl "device atkbdc"
.Dl "device atkbd"
.Pp
The following example shows how to set the default, built-in keymap
to
.Pa jp.106.kbd .
.Pp
.Dl "device atkbdc"
.Dl "options ATKBD_DFLT_KEYMAP"
.Dl "makeoptions ATKBD_DFLT_KEYMAP=jp.106"
.Dl "device atkbd"
.Pp
In both cases, you also need to have following lines in
.Pa /boot/device.hints .
.Pp
.Dl hint.atkbdc.0.at="isa"
.Dl hint.atkbdc.0.port="0x060"
.Dl hint.atkbd.0.at="atkbdc"
.Dl hint.atkbd.0.irq="1"
.\".Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\".Sh CAVEATS
.\".Sh BUGS
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kbdcontrol 1 ,
.Xr atkbdc 4 ,
.Xr psm 4 ,
.Xr syscons 4 ,
.Xr vt 4 ,
.Xr kbdmap 5 ,
.Xr loader 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An S\(/oren Schmidt Aq Mt sos@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Kazutaka Yokota Aq Mt yokota@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Kazutaka Yokota .
