.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Rohit Grover <rgrover1 at gmail dot com>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 24, 2014
.Dt ATP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm atp
.Nd Apple touchpad driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device atp"
.Cd "device usb"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
atp_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Apple Internal Trackpad device found in many
Apple laptops.
Older (Fountain/Geyser) and the newer (Wellspring) trackpad
families are all supported through a unified driver.
.Pp
The driver simulates a three\-button mouse using multi\-finger tap detection.
Single finger tap generates a left\-button click; two\-finger tap maps to the
middle button; whereas a three\-finger tap gets treated as a right button
click.
.Pp
There is support for 2\-finger horizontal scrolling, which translates to
page\-back/forward events; vertical multi\-finger scrolling emulates the mouse
wheel.
.Pp
A double\-tap followed by a drag is treated as a selection gesture; a
virtual left\-button click is assumed for the lifespan of the drag.
.Pp
.Nm
supports dynamic reconfiguration using
.Xr sysctl 8 ;
through nodes under
.Nm hw.usb.atp .
Pointer sensitivity can be controlled using the sysctl tunable
.Nm hw.usb.atp.scale_factor .
Smaller values of
.Fa scale_factor
result in faster movement.
.
A simple high-pass filter is used to reduce contributions
from small movements; the threshold for this filter may be controlled by
.Nm hw.usb.atp.small_movement .
.
The maximum tolerable duration of a touch gesture is controlled by
.Nm hw.usb.atp.touch_timeout
(in microseconds); beyond this period, touches are considered to be slides.
(This conversion also happens when a finger stroke accumulates at least
.Nm hw.usb.atp.slide_min_movement
movement (in mickeys).
.
The maximum time (in microseconds) to allow an association between a double-
tap and drag gesture may be controlled by
.Nm hw.usb.atp.double_tap_threshold .
.
Should one want to disable tap detection and rely only upon physical button
presses, set the following sysctl to a value of 2
.Nm hw.usb.atp.tap_minimum .
.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the following Product IDs:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
PowerBooks, iBooks (IDs: 0x020e, 0x020f, 0x0210, 0x0214, 0x0215, 0x0216)
.It
Core Duo MacBook & MacBook Pro (IDs: 0x0217, 0x0218, 0x0219)
.It
Core2 Duo MacBook & MacBook Pro (IDs: 0x021a, 0x021b, 0x021c)
.It
Core2 Duo MacBook3,1 (IDs: 0x0229, 0x022a, 0x022b)
.It
12 inch PowerBook and iBook (IDs: 0x030a, 0x030b)
.It
15 inch PowerBook (IDs: 0x020e, 0x020f, 0x0215)
.It
17 inch PowerBook (ID: 0x020d)
.It
Almost all recent Macbook-Pros and Airs (IDs: 0x0223, 0x0223, 0x0224, 0x0224,
0x0225, 0x0225, 0x0230, 0x0230, 0x0231, 0x0231, 0x0232, 0x0232, 0x0236,
0x0236, 0x0237, 0x0237, 0x0238, 0x0238, 0x023f, 0x023f, 0x0240, 0x0241,
0x0242, 0x0243, 0x0244, 0x0245, 0x0246, 0x0247, 0x0249, 0x024a, 0x024b,
0x024c, 0x024d, 0x024e, 0x0252, 0x0252, 0x0253, 0x0253, 0x0254, 0x0254,
0x0259, 0x025a, 0x025b, 0x0262, 0x0262, 0x0263, 0x0264, 0x0290, 0x0291,
0x0292)
.El
.Pp
To discover the product\-id of a touchpad, search for 'Trackpad' in the
output of
.Xr lshal 1
and look up the property
.Nm usb_device.product_id .
.Sh FILES
.Nm
creates a blocking pseudo\-device file,
.Pa /dev/atp0 ,
which presents the mouse as a
.Ar sysmouse
or
.Ar mousesystems
type device\-\-see
.Xr moused 8
for an explanation of these mouse
types.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysmouse 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr xorg.conf 5 Pq Pa ports/x11/xorg ,
.Xr moused 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Rohit Grover Aq Mt rgrover1@gmail.com .
