.\"	$OpenBSD: aue.4,v 1.39 2022/02/17 12:24:08 jsg Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: aue.4,v 1.9 2002/07/11 00:23:31 rh Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"     Bill Paul <wpaul@ee.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/aue.4,v 1.2 2000/01/07 22:18:47 wpaul Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 17 2022 $
.Dt AUE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aue
.Nd ADMtek AN986/ADM8511 Pegasus family 10/100 USB Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "aue* at uhub?"
.Cd "acphy* at mii?"
.Cd "bmtphy* at mii?"
.Cd "sqphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB Ethernet adapters based on the ADMtek
AN986 ("Pegasus") and ADM8511 ("Pegasus II") chipsets.
This includes the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Tn 3Com 3c460b
.It Tn Abocom UFE1000
.It Tn Abocom DSB650TX
.It Tn Accton USB320-EC
.It Tn Accton SpeedStream Ethernet
.It Tn Admtek Pegasus
.It Tn Admtek Pegasus II
.It Tn AEI USB Fast Ethernet
.It Tn Allied Telesyn AT-USB100
.It Tn ATEN UC-110T
.It Tn Belkin F5D5050
.It Tn Billionton Systems USB100
.It Tn Billionton Systems USB100EL
.It Tn Billionton Systems USB100LP
.It Tn Billionton Systems USBE100
.It Tn Corega FEther USB-TX
.It Tn Corega FEther USB-TXS
.It Tn D-Link DSB-650
.It Tn D-Link DSB-650TX
.It Tn D-Link DSB-650TX-PNA
.It Tn ELCON Systemtechnik Goldpfeil P-LAN
.It Tn Elecom LD-USB/TX
.It Tn Elecom LD-USB20
.It Tn Elecom LD-USBL/TX
.It Tn Elsa Microlink USB2Ethernet
.It Tn GIGABYTE GN-BR402W
.It Tn Hawking UF100
.It Tn HP HN210E
.It Tn I/O DATA USB ET/TX
.It Tn I/O DATA USB ET/TX-S
.It Tn I/O DATA ETX-US2
.It Tn Kingston KNU101TX
.It Tn Laneed LD-USBL/TX
.It Tn Linksys USB100TX
.It Tn Linksys USB100H1
.It Tn Linksys USB10T
.It Tn Linksys USB10TA
.It Tn Linksys USB10TX
.It Tn Logitec LAN-TX/U1H2
.It Tn Melco Inc. LUA-TX
.It Tn Melco Inc. LUA2-TX
.It Tn Microsoft MN110
.It Tn Mobility EasiDock Ethernet
.It Tn Netgear FA101
.It Tn Omnidirectional Control Technology USB TO Ethernet
.It Tn Siemens SpeedStream USB
.It Tn Smartbridges smartNIC 2
.It Tn SMC 2202USB/ETH
.It Tn SMC 2206USB/ETH
.It Tn SOHOware NUB100
.It Tn SOHOware NUB110
.El
.Pp
The Pegasus family of chipsets contain a 10/100
.Tn Ethernet
MAC with an MII interface and are designed to work with both
.Tn Ethernet
and HomePNA transceivers.
Although the chipsets are designed to interface with
100Mbps peripherals, the USB 1.x standards specify a maximum
transfer speed of 12Mbps.
Users should therefore not expect to actually
achieve 100Mbps speeds with these devices.
.Pp
The Pegasus chipsets support a 64-bit multicast hash table, single perfect
filter entry for the station address and promiscuous mode.
Packets are
received and transmitted over separate USB bulk transfer endpoints.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width tenletters
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the appropriate
.Xr hostname.if 5
file.
.It 10baseT
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to enable
.Ar full-duplex
operation.
Not specifying
.Ar full duplex
implies
.Ar half-duplex
mode.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast
.Tn Ethernet )
operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to enable
.Ar full-duplex
operation.
Not specifying
.Ar full duplex
implies
.Ar half-duplex
mode.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width tenletters
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
The interface will operate in
half duplex mode if this media option is not specified.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "aue0: watchdog timeout"
A packet was queued for transmission and a transmit command was
issued, however the device failed to acknowledge the transmission
before a timeout expired.
.It "aue0: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acphy 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr bmtphy 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr sqphy 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T ADMtek AN986 and ADM8511 data sheets
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Ox
support was added in
.Ox 2.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ee.columbia.edu
and ported to
.Ox
by
.An Aaron Campbell Aq Mt aaron@openbsd.org .
