.\"	$OpenBSD: axen.4,v 1.11 2024/10/07 07:35:40 kevlo Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Yojiro UO <yuo@nui.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: October 7 2024 $
.Dt AXEN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm axen
.Nd ASIX Electronics AX88179/AX88179A/AX88772D 10/100/1Gb USB Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "axen*   at uhub?"
.Cd "rgephy* at mii?"
.Cd "ukphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB Ethernet adapters based on the ASIX
Electronics AX88179/AX88179A/AX88772D chipset, including the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It D-Link DUB-1312
.It Kuroutoshikou GbE-USB3.0
.It Logitec LAN-GTJU3
.It Sitecom LN-032
.It StarTech USB31000S
.It TP-LINK UE300C v2
.It TP-Link UE306
.It Ugreen CM650-15632
.El
.Pp
The AX88772D is a USB 2.0 device which supports both
10 and 100Mbps speeds in either full or half duplex.
The AX88179 and AX88179A are USB 3.0 devices, which contain
a 10/100/1Gb Ethernet MAC with a GMII/MII interface.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width "autoselect"
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options (this is the default).
The user can manually override the autoselected mode by adding media
options to the appropriate
.Xr hostname.if 5
file.
.It 10baseT
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.It 1000baseT
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr rgephy 4 ,
.Xr ukphy 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 5.4 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Yojiro UO Aq Mt yuo@nui.org .
