.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This documentation was written by Landon Fuller under sponsorship from
.\" the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 16, 2017
.Dt BHND_CHIPC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bhnd_chipc
.Nd Broadcom Home Networking Division ChipCommon Driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, add this line to the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device bhnd"
.Ed
.Pp
To compile driver support for all additional devices found in embedded systems,
add the following additional lines to the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device cfi"
.Cd "device gpio"
.Cd "device spibus"
.Cd "device uart"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot, add this line to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bhnd_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the ChipCommon core found in Broadcom Home Networking
Division network chipsets and embedded systems.
.Pp
The ChipCommon core provides an interface to common hardware facilities,
including device identification, UARTs, CFI and SPI flash, One-time Programmable
(OTP) Memory, and GPIO.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bhnd 4 ,
.Xr intro 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Landon Fuller Aq Mt landonf@FreeBSD.org ,
and
.An Michael Zhilin Aq Mt mizhka@FreeBSD.org .
