.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Landon Fuller
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 3, 2016
.Dt BHND 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bhnd
.Nd Broadcom Home Networking Division interconnect bus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, add the following lines to the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device bhnd"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot, add this line to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bhnd_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides a unified kernel bus interface to the on-chip
interconnects used in Broadcom Home Networking Division (HND)
devices.
.Pp
The Broadcom HND device family consists of SoCs (System On a Chip)
and host-connected chipsets based on a common library of Broadcom IP
cores connected via an internal hardware bus architecture.
Drivers for these cores are implemented against the unified
.Nm
interface.
.Pp
The Sonic Inc. Silicon Backplane used in earlier HND devices is supported
by the
.Xr siba 4
BHND driver.
.Pp
The ARM AMBA-based interconnect used in later HND devices is supported by
the
.Xr bcma 4
BHND driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bcma 4 ,
.Xr bhndb 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr siba 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Landon Fuller Aq Mt landonf@FreeBSD.org .
