.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Landon Fuller <landonf@FreeBSD.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Portions of this documentation were written by Landon Fuller
.\" under sponsorship from the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 16th, 2017
.Dt BHNDB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bhndb
.Nd Broadcom Home Networking Division interconnect bridge driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, add the following lines to the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device bhnd"
.Cd "device bhndb"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot, add this line to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bhndb_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Xr bhnd 4
host bridge support for Broadcom Home Networking Division's wireless chipsets
and network adapters.
.Pp
To enable use for PCI/PCIe systems, see the
.Xr bhndb_pci 4
driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bhnd 4 ,
.Xr bhndb_pci 4 ,
.Xr bwn 4 ,
.Xr intro 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Landon Fuller Aq Mt landonf@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver does not currently support PCMCIA or SDIO devices.
