.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Amancio Hasty and Roger Hardiman
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Amancio Hasty and
.\"	Roger Hardiman.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $OpenBSD: bktr.4,v 1.30 2024/09/01 05:33:29 jsg Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD: /c/ncvs/src/share/man/man4/bktr.4,v 1.9.2.5 2001/03/06 19:08:09 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 1 2024 $
.Dt BKTR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bktr
.Nd Brooktree Bt848/849/878/879 PCI TV tuners and video capture boards
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "bktr* at pci?"
.Cd "radio* at bktr?"
.Pp
.In dev/ic/bt8xx.h
.Pp
.Cd "option BKTR_ALLOC_PAGES=nnn"
.Cd "option BKTR_SYSTEM_DEFAULT=XXX"
.Cd "option BKTR_OVERRIDE_CARD=nnn"
.Cd "option BKTR_OVERRIDE_MSP=n"
.Cd "option BKTR_OVERRIDE_TUNER=nnn"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI video capture and VBI capture on low cost,
high performance boards.
This should support most video cards based on the
Brooktree Bt848/849/878/879 Video Capture Chip.
The driver also supports FM Radio if the Tuner supports it.
.Pp
Specifically, the following cards are known to work:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
Animation Technologies FlyVideo
AOpen VA1000
Askey/Dynalink Magic TView
ATI TV-Wonder and Wonder/VE
AverMedia cards
Hauppauge Wincast TV and WinTV/PCI
IMS TV Turbo
Intel Smart Video Recorder III
I/O DATA GV-BCTV2/PCI
I/O DATA GV-BCTV3/PCI
KISS TV/FM PCI
Leadtek Winfast TV 2000
Leadtek Winfast TV 2000 XP
Miro PC TV
MMAC Osprey
NEC PK-UG-X017
STB TV PCI Television Tuner
Terratec TerraTVplus
Video Highway XTreme
VideoLogic Captivator PCI
Zoltrix TV and Genie TV/FM
.Ed
.Pp
The driver currently supports the following features:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
PCI to PCI DMA transfer
clipping
yuv
rgb16
rgb24
rgb32
.Ed
.Pp
On these cards, tuners and other components are interconnected with an I2C bus.
The Brooktree848 chips act as a master device on the bus to control them.
.Sh VIDEO CAPTURE INTERFACE
The video capture interface to
.Nm
is accessed through
.Pa /dev/bktrN
devices.
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
commands are supported on the Brooktree848 video capture interface:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv METEORSFMT Fa "unsigned long *"
This command sets the video format, also sometimes referred to as the
video norm.
The supported formats are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It Dv METEOR_FMT_NTSC
NTSC
.It Dv METEOR_FMT_PAL
PAL
.It Dv METEOR_FMT_SECAM
SECAM
.It Dv METEOR_FMT_AUTOMODE
hardware default
.El
.It Dv METEORGFMT Fa "unsigned long *"
This command retrieves the current video format to the
.Vt unsigned long *
argument.
.It Dv METEORSETGEO Fa "struct meteor_geomet *"
This command sets the video properties that affect the bit size of
a frame through the
.Vt meteor_geomet *
argument.
.Bd -literal
struct meteor_geomet {
	u_short		rows;	 /* height in pixels*/
	u_short		columns; /* width in pixels */
	u_short		frames;
	u_long		oformat;
}
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va frames
field is the number of frames to buffer.
Currently only 1 frame is supported for most operations.
.Pp
The
.Va oformat
field is a bit-field describing the output pixel format
type and which video fields to capture.
The following are supported pixel format types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_RGB16
16-bit RGB
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_RGB24
24-bit RGB in 32 bits
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_YUV_PACKED
16-bit 4:2:2 YUV
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_YUV_PLANAR
16-bit 4:2:2 YUV
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_YUV_UNSIGNED
unsigned UV
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_YUV_422
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_YUV_12
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_YUV_9
.El
.Pp
The following are supported field capture modes:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_ODD_ONLY
only odd fields
.It Dv METEOR_GEO_EVEN_ONLY
only even fields
.El
.Pp
By default, frames will consist of both the odd and even fields.
.It Dv METEORGSUPPIXFMT Fa "struct meteor_pixfmt *"
This command is used iteratively to fetch descriptions of supported
output pixel formats into the
.Vt meteor_pixfmt *
argument.
.Bd -literal
struct meteor_pixfmt {
	u_int          index;
	METEOR_PIXTYPE type;
	u_int          Bpp;		/* bytes per pixel */
	u_long         masks[3];	/* YUV bit masks */
	unsigned       swap_bytes :1;
	unsigned       swap_shorts:1;
};
.Ed
.Pp
To query all the supported formats, start with an index field of 0 and
continue with successive encodings (1, 2, ...) until the command returns
an error.
.It Dv METEORSACTPIXFMT Fa "int *"
This command sets the active pixel format.
The
.Vt int *
argument is the index of the pixel format as returned by
.Dv METEORGSUPPIXFMT .
.It Dv METEORGACTPIXFMT Fa "int *"
This command fetches the active pixel format index into the
.Vt int *
argument.
.It Dv METEORSINPUT Fa "unsigned long *"
This command sets the input port of the Brooktree848 device.
The following are supported input ports:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It Dv METEOR_INPUT_DEV0
composite (RCA)
.It Dv METEOR_INPUT_DEV1
tuner
.It Dv METEOR_INPUT_DEV2
composite S-video
.It Dv METEOR_INPUT_DEV3
mystery device
.It Dv METEOR_INPUT_DEV_RGB
rgb meteor
.It Dv METEOR_INPUT_DEV_SVIDEO
S-Video
.El
.Pp
Not all devices built with Brooktree848 chips support the
full list of input ports.
.It Dv METEORGINPUT Fa "unsigned long *"
This command retrieves the current input port to the
.Vt unsigned long *
argument.
.It Dv METEORSFPS Fa "unsigned short *"
This command sets the number of frames to grab each second.
Valid frame rates are integers from 0 to 30.
.It Dv METEORGFPS Fa "unsigned short *"
This command fetches the number of frames to grab each second into the
.Vt unsigned short *
argument.
.It Dv METEORCAPTUR Fa "int *"
This command controls capturing of video data.
The following are valid arguments:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It Dv METEOR_CAP_SINGLE
capture one frame
.It Dv METEOR_CAP_CONTINOUS
continuously capture
.It Dv METEOR_CAP_STOP_CONT
stop continuous capture
.El
.It Dv METEORSSIGNAL Fa "unsigned int *"
This command controls the signal emission properties of
.Nm .
If the
.Vt unsigned int *
argument is a valid signal, then that signal will be emitted
when either a frame or field capture has completed.
To select between frame or field signalling, the following arguments
are used:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It Dv METEOR_SIG_FRAME
signal every frame
.It Dv METEOR_SIG_FIELD
signal every field
.El
.Pp
By default, signals will be generated for every frame.
Generation of signals is terminated with the
.Dv METEOR_SIG_MODE_MASK
argument.
.El
.Sh TUNER INTERFACE
Most cards supported by this driver feature a hardware television tuner
on the I2C bus.
The tuner interface to
.Nm
is accessed through
.Pa /dev/tunerN
devices.
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
commands are supported on the tuner interface:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv TVTUNER_SETTYPE Fa "unsigned int *"
This command sets the tuner's TV channel set, also sometimes called the TV
channel band.
This setting is used to calculate the proper tuning frequencies.
The desired channel set must be selected before attempting to set the tuner
channel or frequency.
The following is a list of valid channel sets:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It Dv CHNLSET_NABCST
North America broadcast
.It Dv CHNLSET_CABLEIRC
North America IRC cable
.It Dv CHNLSET_CABLEHRC
North America HRC cable
.It Dv CHNLSET_WEUROPE
Western Europe
.It Dv CHNLSET_JPNBCST
Japan broadcast
.It Dv CHNLSET_JPNCABLE
Japan cable
.It Dv CHNLSET_XUSSR
Russia
.It Dv CHNLSET_AUSTRALIA
Australia
.It Dv CHNLSET_FRANCE
France
.El
.It Dv TVTUNER_GETTYPE Fa "unsigned int *"
This command fetches the tuner's current channel set to the
.Vt unsigned int *
argument.
.It Dv TVTUNER_SETCHNL Fa "unsigned int *"
This command sets the tuner's frequency to a specified channel in the
current channel set.
.It Dv TVTUNER_GETCHNL Fa "unsigned int *"
This command fetches the last selected channel.
Note that it is not necessarily the current channel.
In particular, changing the tuner's frequency by a command other than
.Dv TVTUNER_SETCHNL
will not update this setting, and it defaults to 0 on driver
initialization.
.It Dv TVTUNER_SETFREQ Fa "unsigned int *"
This command sets the tuner's frequency to 1/16th the value of the
.Vt unsigned int *
argument, in MHz.
Note that the current channelset is used to determine frequency
offsets when this command is executed.
.It Dv TVTUNER_GETFREQ Fa "unsigned int *"
This command fetches the tuner's current frequency to the
.Vt unsigned int *
argument.
Note that this value is 16 times the actual tuner frequency, in MHz.
.It Dv BT848_SAUDIO Fa "int *"
This command controls the audio input port and mute state.
The following is a list of valid arguments:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 18n
.It Dv AUDIO_TUNER
tuner audio port
.It Dv AUDIO_EXTERN
external audio port
.It Dv AUDIO_INTERN
internal audio port
.It Dv AUDIO_MUTE
mute audio
.It Dv AUDIO_UNMUTE
unmute audio
.El
.It Dv BT848_GAUDIO Fa "int *"
This command fetches the audio input and mute state bits to the
.Vt int *
argument.
.El
.Sh KERNEL OPTIONS
The following kernel configuration options are available:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxx
.It Cd option BKTR_ALLOC_PAGES=nnn
Specifies the number of contiguous pages to allocate when successfully
probed.
The default number of pages allocated by the kernel is 216.
This means that there are (216*4096) bytes available for use.
.It Cd option BKTR_SYSTEM_DEFAULT="(BROOKTREE_PAL | BROOKTREE_NTSC)"
One of these options can be used to set the default video format for the driver.
This fixed random hangs and lockups with the VideoLogic Captivator PCI card.
.It Cd option BKTR_OVERRIDE_CARD=nnn
Select a specific card (overrides autodetection).
`nnn' is set to one of the names listed and explained below.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "CARD_ASKEY_DYNALINK_MAGIC_TVIEW" -compact
.It CARD_ASKEY_DYNALINK_MAGIC_TVIEW
Askey/Dynalink Magic TView
.It CARD_AVER_MEDIA
AverMedia
.It CARD_FLYVIDEO
Animation Technologies FlyVideo
.It CARD_AOPEN_VA1000
AOpen VA1000
.It CARD_TVWONDER
ATI TV-Wonder/VE
.It CARD_HAUPPAUGE
Hauppauge Wincast TV and WinTV
.It CARD_IMS_TURBO
IMS TV Turbo
.It CARD_INTEL
Intel Smart Video Recorder III
.It CARD_IO_GV
I/O DATA GV-BCTV2/PCI
.It CARD_IO_BCTV3
I/O DATA GV-BCTV3/PCI
.It CARD_KISS
KISS TV/FM PCI
.It CARD_LEADTEK
Leadtek Winfast TV 2000
.It CARD_LEADTEK_XP
Leadtek Winfast TV 2000 XP
.It CARD_MIRO
Miro PC TV
.It CARD_OSPREY
MMAC Osprey
.It CARD_NEC_PK
NEC PK-UG-X017
.It CARD_STB
STB TV PCI Television Tuner
.It CARD_TERRATVPLUS
Terratec TerraTVplus
.It CARD_VIDEO_HIGHWAY_XTREME
Video Highway XTreme
.It CARD_ZOLTRIX
Zoltrix TV
.It CARD_ZOLTRIX_GENIE_FM
Zoltrix Genie TV/FM
.El
.It Cd option BKTR_OVERRIDE_MSP=n
Specifies whether the MSP3400C chip is present (overrides autodetection).
.It Cd option BKTR_OVERRIDE_TUNER=nnn
Select a specific tuner (overrides autodetection).
`nnn' is set to one of the names listed and explained below.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 28n
.It TEMIC_NTSC
Temic 4032FY5
.It TEMIC_PAL
Temic 4002FH5
.It TEMIC_SECAM
Temic 4002FN5
.It PHILIPS_NTSC
Philips FI1236
.It PHILIPS_PAL
Philips FM1216
.It PHILIPS_SECAM
Philips FI1216MF
.It TEMIC_PALI
Temic 4062FY5
.It PHILIPS_PALI
Philips FI1246
.It PHILIPS_FR1236_NTSC
Philips FR1236 MK2
.It PHILIPS_FR1216_PAL
Philips FM1216
.It PHILIPS_FR1236_SECAM
Philips FM1216MF
.It ALPS_TSCH5
Alps TSCH5 NTSC
.It ALPS_TSBH1
Alps TSBH1 NTSC
.It TIVISION_TVF5533
Tivision TVF5533-MF NTSC
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr radio 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver is based on the work of
.An Jim Lowe Aq Mt james@miller.cs.uwm.edu ,
.An Mark Tinguely Aq Mt tinguely@plains.nodak.edu ,
.An Amancio Hasty Aq Mt hasty@star\-gate.com ,
.An Roger Hardiman Aq Mt roger@FreeBSD.org
and a bunch of other people.
.Sh CAVEATS
On big-endian architectures it is not possible to program the
card to perform proper byte swapping in 24 bit modes,
therefore only 16 and 32 bit modes are supported.
