.\"
.\" blackhole - drop refused TCP or UDP connects
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd September 6, 2015
.Dt BLACKHOLE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm blackhole
.Nd a
.Xr sysctl 8
MIB for manipulating behaviour in respect of refused SCTP, TCP, or UDP connection
attempts
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd sysctl net.inet.sctp.blackhole Ns Op = Ns Brq "0 | 1 | 2"
.Cd sysctl net.inet.tcp.blackhole Ns Op = Ns Brq "0 | 1 | 2"
.Cd sysctl net.inet.udp.blackhole Ns Op = Ns Brq "0 | 1"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
.Xr sysctl 8
MIB is used to control system behaviour when connection requests
are received on SCTP, TCP, or UDP ports where there is no socket listening.
.Pp
The blackhole behaviour is useful to slow down an attacker who is port-scanning
a system in an attempt to detect vulnerable services.
It might also slow down an attempted denial of service attack.
.Ss SCTP
Setting the SCTP blackhole MIB to a numeric value of one
will prevent sending an ABORT packet in response to an incoming INIT.
A MIB value of two will do the same, but will also prevent sending an ABORT packet
when unexpected packets are received.
.Ss TCP
Normal behaviour, when a TCP SYN segment is received on a port where
there is no socket accepting connections, is for the system to return
a RST segment, and drop the connection.
The connecting system will
see this as a
.Dq Connection refused .
By setting the TCP blackhole
MIB to a numeric value of one, the incoming SYN segment
is merely dropped, and no RST is sent, making the system appear
as a blackhole.
By setting the MIB value to two, any segment arriving
on a closed port is dropped without returning a RST.
This provides some degree of protection against stealth port scans.
.Ss UDP
Enabling blackhole behaviour turns off the sending
of an ICMP port unreachable message in response to a UDP datagram which
arrives on a port where there is no socket listening.
It must be noted that this behaviour will prevent remote systems from running
.Xr traceroute 8
to a system.
.Sh WARNING
The SCTP, TCP, and UDP blackhole features should not be regarded as a replacement
for firewall solutions.
Better security would consist of the
.Nm
.Xr sysctl 8
MIB used in conjunction with one of the available firewall packages.
.Pp
This mechanism is not a substitute for securing a system.
It should be used together with other security mechanisms.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr sctp 4 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr udp 4 ,
.Xr ipf 8 ,
.Xr ipfw 8 ,
.Xr pfctl 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The TCP and UDP
.Nm
MIBs
first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Pp
The SCTP
.Nm
MIB first appeared in
.Fx 9.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Geoffrey M. Rehmet
