.\"	$OpenBSD: bnx.4,v 1.32 2021/09/08 20:29:21 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\"Copyright (c) 2006 Broadcom Corporation
.\" David Christensen <davidch@broadcom.com>.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\"are met:
.\"
.\"1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"3. Neither the name of Broadcom Corporation nor the name of its contributors
.\"   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written consent.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS'
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\"ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\"BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\"CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\"SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\"INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\"CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\"ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\"THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: /repoman/r/ncvs/src/share/man/man4/bce.4,v 1.2 2006/04/10 20:12:17 brueffer Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 8 2021 $
.Dt BNX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bnx
.Nd Broadcom NetXtreme II 10/100/1Gb Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "bnx* at pci?"
.Cd "brgphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports Broadcom's NetXtreme II product family which is made up of
the BCM5706, BCM5708, BCM5709, and BCM5716 Ethernet controller chips.
Products using these controller chips include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
HP NC370F PCI-X Multifunction Gigabit server adapter (1000baseSX)
.It
HP NC370T PCI-X Multifunction Gigabit server adapter (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP Dual NC370i Multifunction Gigabit embedded server adapter (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP NC373F PCI Express Multifunction Gigabit server adapter (1000baseSX)
.It
HP NC373i PCI Express Multifunction Gigabit embedded server adapter (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP NC374m PCI Express Multifunction Gigabit embedded server adapter (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP NC373T PCI Express Multifunction Gigabit server adapter (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP NC380T PCI Express Dual Port Multifunction Gigabit server adapter (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP NC382T PCI Express Dual Port server adapter (10/100/1000baseT)
.El
.Pp
The NetXtreme II product family is composed of various Converged NIC (or CNIC)
Ethernet controllers which support a TCP Offload Engine (TOE),
Remote DMA (RDMA), and iSCSI acceleration,
in addition to standard L2 Ethernet traffic,
all on the same controller.
The following features are supported in the
.Nm
driver under
.Ox :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
IPv4 receive IP/TCP/UDP checksum offload
IPv4 transmit TCP/UDP checksum offload
.\"jumbo frames
VLAN tag insertion and stripping
interrupt coalescing
10/100/1000Mbps operation in full-duplex mode
10/100Mbps operation in half-duplex mode
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width "10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode via
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Set 1000baseT operation over twisted pair.
Only
.Cm full-duplex
mode is supported.
.It Cm 1000baseSX
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
Only
.Cm full-duplex
mode is supported.
.It Cm 2500baseSX
Set 2500Mbps operation.
Only
.Cm full-duplex
mode is supported.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width "full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh FILES
The adapter needs firmware files to run, which are loaded on demand by the
driver when the device is attached:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/bnx-b06
.It Pa /etc/firmware/bnx-b09
.It Pa /etc/firmware/bnx-rv2p
.It Pa /etc/firmware/bnx-xi-rv2p
.It Pa /etc/firmware/bnx-xi90-rv2p
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr brgphy 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An David Christensen Aq Mt davidch@broadcom.com
and ported to
.Ox
by
.An Brad Smith Aq Mt brad@openbsd.org .
