.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Broadcom, All Rights Reserved.
.\" The term Broadcom refers to Broadcom Limited and/or its subsidiaries
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS'
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 30, 2019
.Dt BNXT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bnxt
.Nd "Broadcom NetXtreme-C/NetXtreme-E Family Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iflib"
.Cd "device bnxt"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_bnxt_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various NICs based on the Broadcom BCM57301/2/4,
and BCM57402/4/6 Ethernet controller chips.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various NICs based on the Broadcom NetXtreme-C and
NetXtreme-E families of Gigabit Ethernet controller chips, including the
following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Broadcom BCM57301 NetXtreme-C 10Gb Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57302 NetXtreme-C 10Gb/25Gb Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57304 NetXtreme-C 10Gb/25Gb/40Gb/50Gb Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57304 NetXtreme-C Ethernet Virtual Function
.It
Broadcom BCM57314 NetXtreme-C Ethernet Virtual Function
.It
Broadcom BCM57402 NetXtreme-E 10Gb Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57402 NetXtreme-E Ethernet Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57404 NetXtreme-E 10Gb/25Gb Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57404 NetXtreme-E Ethernet Virtual Function
.It
Broadcom BCM57404 NetXtreme-E Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57406 NetXtreme-E 10GBASE-T Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57406 NetXtreme-E Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57407 NetXtreme-E 10GBase-T Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57407 NetXtreme-E 25Gb Ethernet Controller
.It
Broadcom BCM57407 NetXtreme-E Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57412 NetXtreme-E Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57414 NetXtreme-E Ethernet Virtual Function
.It
Broadcom BCM57414 NetXtreme-E Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57416 NetXtreme-E Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57417 NetXtreme-E Ethernet Partition
.It
Broadcom BCM57454 NetXtreme-E 10Gb/25Gb/40Gb/50Gb/100Gb Ethernet
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
These variables must be set before loading the driver, either via
.Xr loader.conf 5
or through the use of
.Xr kenv 1 .
These are provided by the
.Xr iflib 4
framework, and might be better documented there.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.iflib.override_nrxds
Override the number of RX descriptors for each queue.
The value is a comma separated list of three positive integers: the size of the
completion ring,
the size of the receive ring, and the size of the aggregation ring respectively.
The completion ring should be at least the size of the aggregation ring plus
four times the size of the receive ring.
These numbers must be powers of two, and zero means to use the default.
Defaults to 0,0,0.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.iflib.override_ntxds
Override the number of TX descriptors for each queue.
The value is a comma separated list of two positive integers: the size of the
completion ring, and the size of the transmit ring respectively.
The completion ring should be at least twice the size of the transmit ring.
These numbers must be powers of two, and zero means to use the default.
Defaults to 0,0.
.It Va override_qs_enable
When set, allows the number of transmit and receive queues to be different.
If not set, the lower of the number of TX or RX queues will be used for both.
.It Va override_nrxqs
Set the number of RX queues.
If zero, the number of RX queues is derived from the number of cores on the
socket connected to the controller.
Defaults to 0.
.It Va override_ntxqs
Set the number of TX queues.
If zero, the number of TX queues is derived from the number of cores on the
socket connected to the controller.
.El
.Pp
These
.Xr sysctl 8
variables can be changed at any time:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.vlan_only
Require that incoming frames must have a VLAN tag on them that matches one that
is configured for the NIC.
Normally, both frames that have a matching VLAN tag and frames that have no
VLAN tag are accepted.
Defaults to 0.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.vlan_strip
When non-zero the NIC strips VLAN tags on receive.
Defaults to 0.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.rx_stall
Enable buffering rather than dropping frames when there are no available host
RX buffers for DMA.
Defaults to 0.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.rss_type
Comma-separated list of RSS hash types to support.
Default is all types.
Defaults to ipv4,tcp_ipv4,udp_ipv4,ipv6,tcp_ipv6,udp_ipv6.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.rss_key
Current RSS key.
Defaults to a randomly generated value which is generated for each device
during attach.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.ver.hwrm_min_ver
Minimum HWRM (HardWare Resource Manager) firmware API to support.
If the firmware implements an older version, a warning will be printed, and the
firmware should be upgraded.
Defaults to 1.2.2.
.El
.Pp
These
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are read-only:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.if_name
Current interface name of the device.
This will normally be
.Va bnxtX ,
but this can be changed using
.Cm ifconfig name .
This sysctl allows correlating an interface with a child of
.Va dev.bnxt .
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.nvram.*
Information about the NVRAM device which contains the device firmware.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.ver.*
Version-related information about the device and firmware:
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.ver.hwrm_if
Supported HWRM API version of the currently running firmware.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.ver.driver_hwrm_if
HWRM API version the driver was built to support.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.hwstats.*
Per-queue statistics tracked by the hardware.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.hwstats.port_stats.*
Per-port statistics tracked by the hardware.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.hwstats.rxq0.drop_pkts
Number of packets dropped by hardware on queue zero.
This number might seem high, but the count includes packets dropped due to
incorrect destination MAC, unsubscribed multicast address, and other normal
reasons to ignore Ethernet frames.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.hwstats.rxq0.tpa_*
statistics related to HW LRO.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.hw_lro.*
Enable / Disable HW LRO feature. Defaults to disable.
Enabling HW LRO could cause issues when forwarding is enabled on host.
.It Va dev.bnxt.X.fc
Enable / Disable Flow Control feature. Defaults to Enable
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "bnxt%d: %s command returned %s error."
Device firmware rejected a command from the driver.
There might be a driver/firmware HWRM API mismatch.
.It "bnxt%d: Timeout sending %s (timeout: %d) seq %d"
Device firmware unresponsive.
A PCI device reset is likely needed.
.It "bnxt%d: Timeout sending %s (timeout: %d) msg {0x%x 0x%x} len:%d v: %d"
Partial firmware response.
A PCI device reset is likely needed.
.Pp
As of this writing, the system must be rebooted to initiate a PCI device reset.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr iflib 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jack Vogel Aq Mt jfvogel@gmail.com 
and 
.An Stephen Hurd Aq Mt shurd@freebsd.org ,
and is currently maintained by
.An Broadcom Limited Aq Mt freebsd.pdl@broadcom.com .
