.\"	$OpenBSD: boca.4,v 1.12 2014/02/20 17:56:35 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)dca.4	5.2 (Berkeley) 3/27/91
.\"	from: Id: com.4,v 1.1 1993/08/06 11:19:07 cgd Exp
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 20 2014 $
.Dt BOCA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm boca
.Nd multiplexing serial communications interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For 4-port BB1004 boards and 8-port BB1008 boards:
.Pp
.Cd "boca0 at isa? port 0x100 irq 5"
.Cd "com* at boca?"
.Pp
For 16-port BB2016 boards:
.Pp
.Cd "boca0 at isa? port 0x100 irq 5"
.Cd "boca1 at isa? port 0x140 irq 5"
.Cd "com* at boca?"
.Pp
(The BB2016 is functionally equivalent to two BB1008 boards,
and is configured as such.)
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for BOCA Research BB1004, BB1008, and BB2016
boards that multiplex together up to four, eight, or sixteen
.Tn EIA
.Tn RS-232C
.Pq Tn CCITT V.28
communications interfaces.
.Pp
Each
.Nm
device is the master device for up to eight
.Nm com
devices.
The kernel configuration specifies these
.Nm com
devices as slave devices of the
.Nm
device, as shown in
.Sx SYNOPSIS .
The slave ID given for each
.Nm com
device determines which bit in the interrupt multiplexing register is
tested to find interrupts for that device.
The
.Cd port
specification for the
.Nm
device is used to compute the base addresses for the
.Nm com
subdevices and the port for the interrupt multiplexing register.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /dev/tty??
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr com 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Charles Hannum ,
based on the
.Nm ast
driver and source code from
.An David Muir Sharnoff .
David wishes to acknowledge the assistance of
.An Jason Venner
in determining how to use the BOCA boards.
