.\" $OpenBSD: bwfm.4,v 1.23 2025/03/27 15:12:14 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Patrick Wildt <patrick@blueri.se>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 27 2025 $
.Dt BWFM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bwfm
.Nd Broadcom and Cypress IEEE 802.11a/ac/ax/b/g/n wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "bwfm* at pci?"
.Cd "bwfm* at sdmmc?"
.Cd "bwfm* at usb?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Broadcom and Cypress FullMAC wireless network
adapters.
.Pp
The following table summarizes supported chipsets and their capabilities,
as well as the bus attachments recognized by the
.Nm
driver:
.Bl -column BCM43236 2GHz/5GHz Type MIMO SDMMC/USB -offset 6n
.It Em Chipset Ta Em Spectrum Ta Em Type Ta Em MIMO Ta Em Bus
.It BCM43143 Ta 2GHz Ta 11n Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC/USB
.It BCM43236 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 2x2 Ta USB
.It BCM4324 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 2x2 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43242 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 2x2 Ta USB
.It BCM4329 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 2x2 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM4330 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 2x2 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM4334 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 2x2 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43340 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43341 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11n Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM4335 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43362 Ta 2GHz Ta 11n Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43364 Ta 2GHz Ta 11n Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM4339 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43430 Ta 2GHz Ta 11n Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43455 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 1x1 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM43456 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 2x2 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM4350 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 2x2 Ta PCI
.It BCM4354 Ta  2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 2x2 Ta SDMMC
.It BCM4356 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 2x2 Ta PCI/SDMMC
.It BCM43569 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 2x2 Ta USB
.It BCM43602 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 3x3 Ta PCI
.It BCM4371 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ac Ta 2x2 Ta PCI
.It BCM4378 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ax Ta 2x2 Ta PCI
.It BCM4387 Ta 2GHz/5GHz Ta 11ax Ta 2x2 Ta PCI
.El
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It Host AP
In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
for other cards.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
The
.Nm
driver relies on the software 802.11 stack for the WPA handshake.
Both encryption and decryption of data frames are handled by the
firmware.
.Pp
The firmware automatically selects the transmit speed and the channel
depending on the received signal strength.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The driver needs a firmware file which is loaded when the driver
attaches.
A prepackaged version of the firmware can be installed using
.Xr fw_update 8 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig bwfm0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures bwfm0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nwid mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example creates a host-based access point on boot:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mediaopt hostap
nwid mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 6.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Patrick Wildt Aq Mt patrick@blueri.se .
.Sh CAVEATS
The firmware is outdated and contains known vulnerabilities.
