.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Christian Brueffer
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 16, 2017
.Dt BWN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bwn
.Nd Broadcom BCM43xx SoftMAC IEEE 802.11 wireless network driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, add the following lines to the kernel
configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device bwn"
.Cd "device bhnd"
.Cd "device bhndb"
.Cd "device bhndb_pci"
.Cd "device bcma"
.Cd "device siba"
.Cd "device gpio"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Cd "device wlan_amrr"
.Cd "device firmware"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot, add the following lines to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_bwn_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Broadcom BCM43xx based
PCI/CardBus network adapters.
.Pp
It supports
.Cm station
and
.Cm monitor
mode operation.
Only one virtual interface may be configured at any time.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
This driver requires firmware to be loaded before it will work.
The
.Pa ports/net/bwn-firmware-kmod
port needs to be installed before
.Xr ifconfig 8
will work.
In most cases the
.Pa bwn_v4_ucode
kernel module from the port should be used.
However, if an LP (low power) PHY is being used, the
.Pa bwn_v4_lp_ucode
module should be used.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Broadcom BCM43xx based wireless devices, including:
.Bl -column "Apple Airport Extreme" "BCM4306" "Mini PCI" "a/b/g"
.It Em "Card" Ta Em "Chip" Ta Em "Bus" Ta Em "Standard"
.It "Apple Airport Extreme	BCM4318	PCI	b/g"
.It "ASUS WL-138g	BCM4318	PCI	b/g"
.It "Buffalo WLI-CB-G54S	BCM4318	CardBus	b/g"
.It "Dell Wireless 1390	BCM4311	Mini PCI	b/g"
.It "Dell Wireless 1470	BCM4318	Mini PCI	b/g"
.It "Dell Truemobile 1400	BCM4309	Mini PCI	b/g"
.It "HP Compaq 6715b	BCM4312	PCI	b/g"
.It "HP nx6125	BCM4319	PCI	b/g"
.It "Linksys WPC54G Ver 3	BCM4318	CardBus	b/g"
.It "Linksys WPC54GS Ver 2	BCM4318	CardBus	b/g"
.It "US Robotics 5411	BCM4318	CardBus	b/g"
.El
.Pp
Users of older Broadcom chipsets (BCM4301, BCM4303 and BCM4306 rev 2)
must use
.Xr bwi 4
because the v4 version of the firmware does not support these chips.
The newer firmware is too big to fit into these old chips.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev bwn0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
    netmask 0xffffff00
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wlan create wlandev bwn0 ssid my_net up"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev bwn0 ssid my_net \e
        wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 weptxkey 1 up
.Ed
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.bwn.usedma
This tunable enables DMA operations on the hardware.
If the value is 0, PIO mode would be used.
The default value is 1.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr bcma 4 ,
.Xr bhnd 4 ,
.Xr bhndb 4 ,
.Xr bwi 4 ,
.Xr cardbus 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr siba 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr wlan_amrr 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.1 .
The driver was updated to support the common Broadcom
.Xr bhnd 4
bus interface in
.Fx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Weongyo Jeong Aq Mt weongyo@FreeBSD.org .
Support for
.Xr bhnd 4
was added by
.An Landon Fuller Aq Mt landonf@FreeBSD.org .
.\".Sh BUGS
.\"Some card based on the BCM4306 and BCM4309 chips do not work properly
.\"on channel 1, 2 and 3.
.Sh CAVEATS
Some LP PHY devices have DMA operation problems that in that case try to
use PIO mode.
