.\"	$OpenBSD: cad.4,v 1.4 2022/01/27 17:36:22 visa Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Visa Hankala
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 27 2022 $
.Dt CAD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cad
.Nd Cadence 10/100/1Gb Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "cad* at fdt?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the Cadence Gigabit Ethernet MAC core found on some SoCs,
including the following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
Microchip PolarFire SoC
.It
SiFive FU740-C000
.It
Xilinx Zynq-7000
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports IPv4 receive IP/TCP/UDP checksum offload,
and IPv6 receive TCP/UDP checksum offload.
.Pp
The following media types and options are supported,
as given to
.Xr ifconfig 8 :
.Bl -tag -width autoselect -offset indent
.It media autoselect
Use auto-negotiation for speed and duplex (default).
.It media 1000baseT mediaopt full-duplex
Use 1000baseT on copper, full duplex.
.It media 100baseTX mediaopt full-duplex
Use 100baseTX on copper, full duplex.
.It media 100baseTX mediaopt half-duplex
Use 100baseTX on copper, half duplex.
.It media 10baseT mediaopt full-duplex
Use 10baseT on copper, full duplex.
.It media 10baseT mediaopt half-duplex
Use 10baseT on copper, half duplex.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 7.0
