.\" $OpenBSD: cardbus.4,v 1.72 2021/09/08 20:29:21 jmc Exp $
.\" $NetBSD: cardbus.4,v 1.4 2000/02/02 19:57:17 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 8 2021 $
.Dt CARDBUS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cardbus ,
.Nm cbb
.Nd introduction to CardBus support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "cbb*      at pci?"
.Cd "cardslot* at cbb?"
.Cd "cardbus*  at cardslot?"
.Cd "pcmcia*   at cardslot?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ox
provides machine-independent bus support and drivers for CardBus devices.
.Pp
.Ox
provides support for the following devices.
Note that not all architectures support all devices.
.Ss Wired network interfaces
.Bl -tag -width 12n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr dc 4
DEC/Intel 21140/21142/21143/21145 and clones 10/100 Ethernet device
.It Xr fxp 4
Intel EtherExpress PRO/100 10/100 Ethernet device
.It Xr re 4
Realtek 8139C+/8169/816xS/811xS/8168/810xE 10/100/1Gb Ethernet device
.It Xr rl 4
Realtek 8129/8139 10/100 Ethernet device
.It Xr xl 4
3Com EtherLink XL and Fast EtherLink XL 10/100 Ethernet device
.El
.Ss Wireless network interfaces
.Bl -tag -width 12n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr acx 4
TI ACX100/ACX111 IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless network device
.It Xr ath 4
Atheros IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless network device with GPIO
.It Xr athn 4
Atheros IEEE 802.11a/b/g/n wireless network device
.It Xr atw 4
ADMtek ADM8211 IEEE 802.11b wireless network device
.It Xr bwi 4
Broadcom AirForce IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network device
.It Xr malo 4
Marvell Libertas IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network device
.It Xr pgt 4
Conexant/Intersil Prism GT Full-MAC IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless network device
.It Xr ral 4
Ralink Technology/MediaTek IEEE 802.11a/b/g/n wireless network device
.It Xr rtw 4
Realtek RTL8180L IEEE 802.11b wireless network device
.El
.Ss Serial interfaces
.Bl -tag -width 12n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr com 4
serial communications interface
.It Xr puc 4
PCI
.Dq universal
communications card driver
.El
.Ss Miscellaneous devices
.Bl -tag -width 12n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr ehci 4
USB Enhanced Host Controller Interface
.It Xr ohci 4
USB Open Host Controller Interface
.It Xr uhci 4
USB Universal Host Controller Interface
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pcibios 4 ,
.Xr pcmcia 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
.Ox
support was added in
.Ox 2.7 .
