.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" Written by Tom Rhodes
.\" This file is in the public domain.
.\"
.Dd January 26, 2012
.Dt CISS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ciss
.Nd Common Interface for SCSI-3 Support driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device ciss"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ciss_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver claims to provide a common interface between generic SCSI
transports and intelligent host adapters.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports
.Em CISS
as defined in the document entitled
.%T "CISS Command Interface for SCSI-3 Support Open Specification, Version 1.04, Valence Number 1" ,
dated 2000/11/27, produced by Compaq Computer Corporation.
.Pp
We provide a shim layer between the
.Nm
interface and
.Xr CAM 4 ,
offloading most of the queueing and being-a-disk chores onto CAM.
Entry to the driver is via the PCI bus attachment
.Fn ciss_probe ,
.Fn ciss_attach ,
etc.\& and via the CAM interface
.Fn ciss_cam_action ,
and
.Fn ciss_cam_poll .
The Compaq
.Nm
adapters require faked responses to get reasonable
behavior out of them.
In addition, the
.Nm
command set is by no means adequate to support the functionality
of a RAID controller,
and thus the supported Compaq adapters utilize portions of the
control protocol from earlier Compaq adapter families.
.Pp
Currently
.Nm
supports the
.Dq simple
and
.Dq performant
transport layer.
.Pp
Non-disk devices (such as internal DATs and devices
attached to the external SCSI bus) are supported as normal CAM devices
provided that they are exported by the controller firmware and are not
marked as being masked.
Masked devices can be exposed by setting the
.Va hw.ciss.expose_hidden_physical
tunable to non-zero at boot time.
Direct Access devices (such as disk
drives) are only exposed as
.Xr pass 4
devices.
Hot-insertion and removal of devices is supported and notification messages
will be reported to the console and logs.
.Pp
The problem which adapter freezes with the message
.Dq ADAPTER HEARTBEAT FAILED
might be solved by updating the firmware and/or setting the
.Va hw.ciss.nop_message_heartbeat
tunable to non-zero at boot time.
.Sh HARDWARE
Controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Compaq Smart Array 5300 (simple mode only)
.It
Compaq Smart Array 532
.It
Compaq Smart Array 5i
.It
HP Smart Array 5312
.It
HP Smart Array 6i
.It
HP Smart Array 641
.It
HP Smart Array 642
.It
HP Smart Array 6400
.It
HP Smart Array 6400 EM
.It
HP Smart Array E200
.It
HP Smart Array E200i
.It
HP Smart Array P212
.It
HP Smart Array P220i
.It
HP Smart Array P222
.It
HP Smart Array P230i
.It
HP Smart Array P400
.It
HP Smart Array P400i
.It
HP Smart Array P410
.It
HP Smart Array P410i
.It
HP Smart Array P411
.It
HP Smart Array P420
.It
HP Smart Array P420i
.It
HP Smart Array P421
.It
HP Smart Array P430
.It
HP Smart Array P430i
.It
HP Smart Array P431
.It
HP Smart Array P530
.It
HP Smart Array P531
.It
HP Smart Array P600
.It
HP Smart Array P721m
.It
HP Smart Array P731m
.It
HP Smart Array P800
.It
HP Smart Array P812
.It
HP Smart Array P830
.It
HP Smart Array P830i
.It
HP Modular Smart Array 20 (MSA20)
.It
HP Modular Smart Array 500 (MSA500)
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr pass 4 ,
.Xr xpt 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.Rs
.%T "CISS Command Interface for SCSI-3 Support Open Specification, Version 1.04, Valence Number 1"
.%D 2000/11/27
.%Q "Compaq Computer Corporation"
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mike Smith Aq Mt msmith@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This manual page is based on his comments and was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
