.\" Copyright (c) 2015-2017 Nuxi, https://nuxi.nl/
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd November 30, 2017
.Dt CLOUDABI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cloudabi ,
.Nm cloudabi32 ,
.Nm cloudabi64
.Nd CloudABI support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
Support for 32-bit CloudABI executables can be compiled into the kernel
by adding this line to the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options COMPAT_CLOUDABI32"
.Ed
.Pp
Similarly,
support for 64-bit CloudABI executables can be enabled by adding this
line:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options COMPAT_CLOUDABI64"
.Ed
.Pp
CloudABI support can also be loaded at boot time from
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cloudabi_load="YES"
cloudabi32_load="YES"
cloudabi64_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
CloudABI is a POSIX-like pure capability-based runtime environment,
similar to
.Xr capsicum 4 .
It can be used to develop applications that are cross-platform,
easier to test,
and hardened against security exploits.
.Pp
Support for CloudABI on
.Fx
consists of three separate kernel modules.
The
.Nm cloudabi
kernel module implements all of the system calls that do not depend on
data structures that differ between hardware architectures.
.Pp
The
.Nm cloudabi32
and
.Nm cloudabi64
kernel modules provide implementations of all of the machine-dependent
system calls,
assuming that pointers stored in data structures are either 32 bits or
64 bits in size.
These modules also provide the image activators that load and start ELF
executables.
.Pp
Though the
.Nm cloudabi
module can be loaded on any architecture supported by
.Fx ,
the
.Nm cloudabi32
module is only available on amd64, arm64, armv6, armv7 and i386.
The same holds for the
.Nm cloudabi64
module,
which is only available for amd64 and arm64.
.Pp
A full cross compilation toolchain for CloudABI is available in the
.Pa devel/cloudabi-toolchain
port.
.Pp
The
.Pa sysutils/cloudabi-utils
port provides the
.Xr cloudabi-run 1
utility.
.Xr cloudabi-run 1
can be used to safely execute CloudABI processes with access to a
restricted set of resources.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cloudabi-run 1 ,
.Xr capsicum 4 ,
.Xr linux 4 ,
.Xr elf 5
.Pp
CloudABI for FreeBSD:
.Pa https://nuxi.nl/cloudabi/freebsd/ .
.Pp
cloudlibc on GitHub:
.Pa https://github.com/NuxiNL/cloudlibc .
.Pp
The CloudABI Ports Collection on GitHub:
.Pa https://github.com/NuxiNL/cloudabi-ports .
.Sh HISTORY
CloudABI support first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Nuxi : Pa https://nuxi.nl/ .
