.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006-2007 Daniel Roethlisberger <daniel@roe.ch>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice unmodified, this list of conditions, and the following
.\"    disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 7, 2007
.Dt CMX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cmx
.Nd Omnikey CardMan 4040 smartcard reader device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device cmx
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the PCCARD based
.Em Omnikey CardMan 4040
smartcard reader.
The driver provides a character device special file based
.Em Chip/Smart Card Interface Devices (CCID)
interface.
The driver implements what the vendor calls the
.Em Synchronous API
onto the smartcard reader device.
.Pp
Reading and writing is synchronous, meaning that a call to
.Xr write 2
directly corresponds to a complete CCID command sent to the
device, while the following
.Xr read 2
will return the complete answer from the reader.
There is no support for partial reads or writes.
There is no upper limit on
CCID request or response sizes, but the complete CCID request
must be sent to the driver in
.Xr write 2
and the complete CCID response must fit into the buffer
supplied to
.Xr read 2 .
.Pp
Non-blocking I/O,
.Xr select 2
and
.Xr poll 2
are supported and work as expected.
An open file descriptor
will always be ready for writing, but only ready for reading
if the device indicates that it has data available.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/ports/security/openct -compact
.It Pa /dev/cmx\fBn\fP
Character device special file.
.It Pa /usr/ports/security/openct
OpenCT, a userspace smartcard daemon containing a
.Em CCID
driver which directly supports
.Nm
devices.
.\".It Pa /usr/ports/devel/pcsc-lite
.\"PC/SC-Lite, a userspace smartcard daemon.
.\".It Pa /usr/ports/devel/libccid
.\"libccid, a generic
.\".Em CCID
.\"driver for use by PC/SC-Lite to interface to
.\".Nm
.\"devices.
.El
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
Userland smartcard code written for the vendor's Linux drivers
should work with the
.Nm
driver without modification.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pccard 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm cmx
driver first appeared in
.Fx 7.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Daniel Roethlisberger Aq Mt daniel@roe.ch ,
originally based on the Linux driver v1.1.0 by
.An Omnikey GmbH Lk www.omnikey.com .
Early testing and bug fixes by
.An Marcin Cieslak Aq Mt saper@system.pl .
.Sh BUGS
.An -nosplit
The way the
.Nm
driver talks to the CardMan 4040 is a bit rough.
Due to the complete lack of hardware documentation other than vendor drivers
for other operating systems, the gory details of the device's
I/O registers are not understood very well.
There may be error conditions which can only be solved by physically
reinserting the reader.
