.\"	$NetBSD: crypto.4,v 1.24 2014/01/27 21:23:59 pgoyette Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Portions of this documentation were written by John-Mark Gurney
.\" under sponsorship of the FreeBSD Foundation and
.\" Rubicon Communications, LLC (Netgate).
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Coyote Point Systems, Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004
.\"	Jonathan Stone <jonathan@dsg.stanford.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Jonathan Stone AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Jonathan Stone OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 21, 2017
.Dt CRYPTO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm crypto ,
.Nm cryptodev
.Nd user-mode access to hardware-accelerated cryptography
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device crypto
.Cd device cryptodev
.Pp
.In sys/ioctl.h
.In sys/time.h
.In crypto/cryptodev.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver gives user-mode applications access to hardware-accelerated
cryptographic transforms, as implemented by the
.Xr crypto 9
in-kernel interface.
.Pp
The
.Pa /dev/crypto
special device provides an
.Xr ioctl 2
based interface.
User-mode applications should open the special device,
then issue
.Xr ioctl 2
calls on the descriptor.
User-mode access to
.Pa /dev/crypto
is controlled by three
.Xr sysctl 8
variables,
.Ic kern.userasymcrypto
and
.Ic kern.cryptodevallowsoft .
.Pp
The
.Nm
device provides two distinct modes of operation: one mode for
symmetric-keyed cryptographic requests, and a second mode for
both asymmetric-key (public-key/private-key) requests, and for
modular arithmetic (for Diffie-Hellman key exchange and other
cryptographic protocols).
The two modes are described separately below.
.Sh THEORY OF OPERATION
Regardless of whether symmetric-key or asymmetric-key operations are
to be performed, use of the device requires a basic series of steps:
.Bl -enum
.It
Open a file descriptor for the device.
See
.Xr open 2 .
.It
If any symmetric operation will be performed,
create one session, with
.Dv CIOCGSESSION .
Most applications will require at least one symmetric session.
Since cipher and MAC keys are tied to sessions, many
applications will require more.
Asymmetric operations do not use sessions.
.It
Submit requests, synchronously with
.Dv CIOCCRYPT
(symmetric),
.Dv CIOCCRYPTAEAD
(symmetric),
or
.Dv CIOCKEY
(asymmetric).
.It
Destroy one session with
.Dv CIOCFSESSION .
.It
Close the device with
.Xr close 2 .
.El
.Sh SYMMETRIC-KEY OPERATION
The symmetric-key operation mode provides a context-based API
to traditional symmetric-key encryption (or privacy) algorithms,
or to keyed and unkeyed one-way hash (HMAC and MAC) algorithms.
The symmetric-key mode also permits fused operation,
where the hardware performs both a privacy algorithm and an integrity-check
algorithm in a single pass over the data: either a fused
encrypt/HMAC-generate operation, or a fused HMAC-verify/decrypt operation.
.Pp
To use symmetric mode, you must first create a session specifying
the algorithm(s) and key(s) to use; then issue encrypt or decrypt
requests against the session.
.Ss Algorithms
For a list of supported algorithms, see
.Xr crypto 7
and
.Xr crypto 9 .
.Ss IOCTL Request Descriptions
.\"
.Bl -tag -width CIOCGSESSION
.\"
.It Dv CRIOGET Fa int *fd
Clone the fd argument to
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
yielding a new file descriptor for the creation of sessions.
.\"
.It Dv CIOCFINDDEV Fa struct crypt_find_op *fop
.Bd -literal
struct crypt_find_op {
    int     crid;       /* driver id + flags */
    char    name[32];   /* device/driver name */
};

.Ed
If
.Fa crid
is -1, then find the driver named
.Fa name
and return the id in
.Fa crid .
If
.Fa crid
is not -1, return the name of the driver with
.Fa crid
in
.Fa name .
In either case, if the driver is not found,
.Dv ENOENT
is returned.
.It Dv CIOCGSESSION Fa struct session_op *sessp
.Bd -literal
struct session_op {
    u_int32_t cipher;	/* e.g. CRYPTO_DES_CBC */
    u_int32_t mac;	/* e.g. CRYPTO_MD5_HMAC */

    u_int32_t keylen;	/* cipher key */
    void * key;
    int mackeylen;	/* mac key */
    void * mackey;

    u_int32_t ses;	/* returns: ses # */
};

.Ed
Create a new cryptographic session on a file descriptor for the device;
that is, a persistent object specific to the chosen
privacy algorithm, integrity algorithm, and keys specified in
.Fa sessp .
The special value 0 for either privacy or integrity
is reserved to indicate that the indicated operation (privacy or integrity)
is not desired for this session.
.Pp
Multiple sessions may be bound to a single file descriptor.
The session ID returned in
.Fa sessp-\*[Gt]ses
is supplied as a required field in the symmetric-operation structure
.Fa crypt_op
for future encryption or hashing requests.
.\" .Pp
.\" This implementation will never return a session ID of 0 for a successful
.\" creation of a session, which is a
.\" .Nx
.\" extension.
.Pp
For non-zero symmetric-key privacy algorithms, the privacy algorithm
must be specified in
.Fa sessp-\*[Gt]cipher ,
the key length in
.Fa sessp-\*[Gt]keylen ,
and the key value in the octets addressed by
.Fa sessp-\*[Gt]key .
.Pp
For keyed one-way hash algorithms, the one-way hash must be specified
in
.Fa sessp-\*[Gt]mac ,
the key length in
.Fa sessp-\*[Gt]mackey ,
and the key value in the octets addressed by
.Fa sessp-\*[Gt]mackeylen .
.\"
.Pp
Support for a specific combination of fused privacy  and
integrity-check algorithms depends on whether the underlying
hardware supports that combination.
Not all combinations are supported
by all hardware, even if the hardware supports each operation as a
stand-alone non-fused operation.
.It Dv CIOCCRYPT Fa struct crypt_op *cr_op
.Bd -literal
struct crypt_op {
    u_int32_t ses;
    u_int16_t op;	/* e.g. COP_ENCRYPT */
    u_int16_t flags;
    u_int len;
    caddr_t src, dst;
    caddr_t mac;		/* must be large enough for result */
    caddr_t iv;
};

.Ed
Request a symmetric-key (or hash) operation.
The file descriptor argument to
.Xr ioctl 2
must have been bound to a valid session.
To encrypt, set
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]op
to
.Dv COP_ENCRYPT .
To decrypt, set
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]op
to
.Dv COP_DECRYPT .
The field
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]len
supplies the length of the input buffer; the fields
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]src ,
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]dst ,
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]mac ,
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]iv
supply the addresses of the input buffer, output buffer,
one-way hash, and initialization vector, respectively.
If a session is using both a privacy algorithm and a hash algorithm,
the request will generate a hash of the input buffer before
generating the output buffer by default.
If the
.Dv COP_F_CIPHER_FIRST
flag is included in the
.Fa cr_op-\*[Gt]flags
field,
then the request will generate a hash of the output buffer after
executing the privacy algorithm.
.It Dv CIOCCRYPTAEAD Fa struct crypt_aead *cr_aead
.Bd -literal
struct crypt_aead {
    u_int32_t ses;
    u_int16_t op;	/* e.g. COP_ENCRYPT */
    u_int16_t flags;
    u_int len;
    u_int aadlen;
    u_int ivlen;
    caddr_t src, dst;
    caddr_t aad;
    caddr_t tag;		/* must be large enough for result */
    caddr_t iv;
};

.Ed
The
.Dv CIOCCRYPTAEAD
is similar to the
.Dv CIOCCRYPT
but provides additional data in
.Fa cr_aead-\*[Gt]aad
to include in the authentication mode.
.It Dv CIOCFSESSION Fa u_int32_t ses_id
Destroys the /dev/crypto session associated with the file-descriptor
argument.
.It Dv CIOCNFSESSION Fa struct crypt_sfop *sfop ;
.Bd -literal
struct crypt_sfop {
    size_t count;
    u_int32_t *sesid;
};

.Ed
Destroys the
.Fa sfop-\*[Gt]count
sessions specified by the
.Fa sfop
array of session identifiers.
.El
.\"
.Sh ASYMMETRIC-KEY OPERATION
.Ss Asymmetric-key algorithms
Contingent upon hardware support, the following asymmetric
(public-key/private-key; or key-exchange subroutine) operations may
also be available:
.Pp
.Bl -column "CRK_DH_COMPUTE_KEY" "Input parameter" "Output parameter" -offset indent -compact
.It Em "Algorithm" Ta "Input parameter" Ta "Output parameter"
.It Em " " Ta "Count" Ta "Count"
.It Dv CRK_MOD_EXP Ta 3 Ta 1
.It Dv CRK_MOD_EXP_CRT Ta 6 Ta 1
.It Dv CRK_DSA_SIGN Ta 5 Ta 2
.It Dv CRK_DSA_VERIFY Ta 7 Ta 0
.It Dv CRK_DH_COMPUTE_KEY Ta 3 Ta 1
.El
.Pp
See below for discussion of the input and output parameter counts.
.Ss Asymmetric-key commands
.Bl -tag -width CIOCKEY
.It Dv CIOCASYMFEAT Fa int *feature_mask
Returns a bitmask of supported asymmetric-key operations.
Each of the above-listed asymmetric operations is present
if and only if the bit position numbered by the code for that operation
is set.
For example,
.Dv CRK_MOD_EXP
is available if and only if the bit
.Pq 1 \*[Lt]\*[Lt] Dv CRK_MOD_EXP
is set.
.It Dv CIOCKEY Fa struct crypt_kop *kop
.Bd -literal
struct crypt_kop {
    u_int crk_op;		/* e.g. CRK_MOD_EXP */
    u_int crk_status;		/* return status */
    u_short crk_iparams;	/* # of input params */
    u_short crk_oparams;	/* # of output params */
    u_int crk_pad1;
    struct crparam crk_param[CRK_MAXPARAM];
};

/* Bignum parameter, in packed bytes. */
struct crparam {
    void * crp_p;
    u_int crp_nbits;
};

.Ed
Performs an asymmetric-key operation from the list above.
The specific operation is supplied in
.Fa kop-\*[Gt]crk_op ;
final status for the operation is returned in
.Fa kop-\*[Gt]crk_status .
The number of input arguments and the number of output arguments
is specified in
.Fa kop-\*[Gt]crk_iparams
and
.Fa kop-\*[Gt]crk_iparams ,
respectively.
The field
.Fa crk_param[]
must be filled in with exactly
.Fa kop-\*[Gt]crk_iparams + kop-\*[Gt]crk_oparams
arguments, each encoded as a
.Fa struct crparam
(address, bitlength) pair.
.Pp
The semantics of these arguments are currently undocumented.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr aesni 4 ,
.Xr hifn 4 ,
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr padlock 4 ,
.Xr safe 4 ,
.Xr ubsec 4 ,
.Xr crypto 7 ,
.Xr geli 8 ,
.Xr crypto 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.0 .
The
.Nm
driver was imported to
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh BUGS
Error checking and reporting is weak.
.Pp
The values specified for symmetric-key key sizes to
.Dv CIOCGSESSION
must exactly match the values expected by
.Xr opencrypto 9 .
The output buffer and MAC buffers supplied to
.Dv CIOCCRYPT
must follow whether privacy or integrity algorithms were specified for
session: if you request a
.No non- Ns Dv NULL
algorithm, you must supply a suitably-sized buffer.
.Pp
The scheme for passing arguments for asymmetric requests is baroque.
.Pp
The naming inconsistency between
.Dv CRIOGET
and the various
.Dv CIOC Ns \&*
names is an unfortunate historical artifact.
