.\" Copyright (c) 2007-2008, Chelsio Inc
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Chelsio Inc nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 14, 2007
.Dt CXGB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cxgb
.Nd "Chelsio T3 10 Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device firmware"
.Cd "device cxgb"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_cxgb_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports Transmit/Receive checksum offload,
Jumbo Frames, TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO),
VLAN hardware insertion / extraction, and VLAN checksum offload.
For further hardware information, see
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
For questions related to hardware requirements,
refer to the documentation supplied with your Chelsio T3 adapter.
All hardware requirements listed apply to use with
.Fx .
.Pp
Support for Jumbo Frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit Jumbo Frames.
The maximum MTU size for Jumbo Frames is 9000.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports 10 Gigabit and 1 Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the T3 and T3B chipset:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Chelsio 10GBase-CX4
.It
Chelsio 10GBase-LR
.It
Chelsio 10GBase-SR
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "cxgb%d: Unable to allocate bus resource: memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "cxgb%d: Unable to allocate bus resource: interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "cxgb%d: Could not find firmware image %s"
The appropriate firmware kld module was not installed.
This is a fatal initialization error.
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Chelsio support website at:
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
If an issue is identified with the released source code on the supported kernel
with a supported adapter, email the specific information related to the
issue to
.Aq Mt support@chelsio.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.3
and
.Fx 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Kip Macy Aq Mt kmacy@FreeBSD.org
with substantial support from
.An Scott Long Aq Mt scottl@FreeBSD.org .
