.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Michael Gmelin <freebsd@grem.de>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 18, 2018
.Dt CYAPA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cyapa
.Nd Cypress APA trackpad with I2C interface driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device cyapa"
.Cd "device ig4"
.Cd "device iicbus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cyapa_load="YES"
ig4_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
On many Chromebook models this driver can be automatically configured with the
help of the
.Xr chromebook_platform 4
driver.
Alternatively, the
.Nm
driver can be manually configured in
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.cyapa.0.at="iicbus0"
.Cd hint.cyapa.0.addr="0xCE"
.Cd hint.cyapa.1.at="iicbus1"
.Cd hint.cyapa.1.addr="0xCE"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Cypress APA trackpad.
It emulates the IntelliMouse PS/2 protocol.
It supports basic mouse ioctls, so that
.Xr moused 8
is supported properly.
.Ss Trackpad layout
.Bd -literal
                   2/3               1/3
          +--------------------+------------+
          |                    |   Middle   |
          |                    |   Button   |
          |       Left         |            |
          |      Button        +------------+
          |                    |   Right    |
          |                    |   Button   |
          +--------------------+............|
          |     Thumb/Button Area           | 15%
          +---------------------------------+
.Ed
.Ss Trackpad features
.Bl -tag -width 8n
.It Va Two finger scrolling
Use two fingers for Z axis scrolling.
.It Va Button down/second finger
While one finger clicks and holds down the touchpad, the second finger can be
used to move the mouse cursor.
This can be useful for drawing or selecting text.
.It Va Thumb/Button area
The lower 15% of the trackpad will not affect the mouse cursor position.
This allows for high precision clicking, by controlling the cursor with the
index finger and pushing/holding the pad down with the thumb.
.It Va Trackpad button
Push physical button.
The left two thirds of the pad issues a LEFT button event.
The upper right corner issues a MIDDLE button event.
The lower right corner issues a RIGHT button.
Optionally, tap to click can be enabled (see below).
.El
.Pp
On a system using
.Xr device.hints 5 ,
these values are configurable for
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width "hint.cyapa.%d.addr"
.It Va hint.cyapa.%d.at
target
.Xr iicbus 4 .
.It Va hint.cyapa.%d.addr
.Nm
i2c address on the
.Xr iicbus 4 .
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
These
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available:
.Bl -tag -width 8n
.It Va debug.cyapa_idle_freq
Scan frequency in idle mode, the default is 1.
.It Va debug.cyapa_slow_freq
Scan frequency in slow mode, the default is 20.
.It Va debug.cyapa_norm_freq
Scan frequency in normal mode, the default is 100.
.It Va debug.cyapa_minpressure
Minimum pressure to detect a finger, the default is 12.
.It Va debug.cyapa_enable_tapclick
Controls tap to click.
Possible values:
.Bl -tag -width 8n
.It 0
Tap to click is disabled.
This is the default value.
.It 1
Tap to click always generates a left mouse button event.
.It 2
Tap to click generates left mouse button event if the left 2/3rds of the pad
are tapped and a right mouse button event otherwise.
.It 3
Tap to click generates mouse button events as if the physical button was
pressed (see
.Sx DESCRIPTION
above).
.El
.It Va debug.cyapa_tapclick_min_ticks
Minimum tap duration in ticks to create a click, the default is 1.
.It Va debug.cyapa_tapclick_max_ticks
Maximum tap duration in ticks to create a click, the default is 8.
.It Va debug.cyapa_move_min_ticks
Minimum ticks before cursor movement occurs, the default is 4.
.It Va debug.cyapa_scroll_wait_ticks
Ticks to wait before starting to scroll, the default is 0.
.It Va debug.cyapa_scroll_stick_ticks
Ticks while preventing cursor movement on single finger after scroll,
the default is 15.
.It Va debug.cyapa_thumbarea_percent
Size of bottom thumb area in percent, the default is 15.
.It Va debug.cyapa_debug
Setting this to a non-zero value enables debug output to console and syslog,
the default is 0.
.It Va debug.cyapa_reset
Setting this to a non-zero value reinitializes the device.
The sysctl resets to zero immediately.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Nm
creates
.Pa /dev/cyapa0 ,
which presents the mouse as an
.Ar IntelliMouse PS/2
device.
It supports
.Xr moused 8
levels 0 through 2, level 1 is used by default.
.Sh EXAMPLES
To use
.Nm
with
.Xr moused 8 ,
add the following lines to the
.Xr rc.conf 5
file:
.Pp
.Dl moused_enable="YES"
.Dl moused_port="/dev/cyapa0"
.Pp
If vertical scrolling is not desired, add
.Pp
.Dl moused_flags="-l0"
.Pp
to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.Pp
Enable tap to click for the left and the right mouse button and
disable the thumb area by adding these lines to the
.Xr sysctl.conf 5
file:
.Pp
.Dl debug.cyapa_thumbarea_percent=0
.Dl debug.cyapa_enable_tapclick=2
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr chromebook_platform 4 ,
.Xr ig4 4 ,
.Xr iicbus 4 ,
.Xr sysmouse 4 ,
.Xr moused 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The original
.Nm
driver was written for DragonFly BSD by
.An Matthew Dillon .
.Pp
It has been ported, modified, and enhanced for
.Fx
by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver detects the device from the I2C address.
This might have unforeseen consequences if the initialization sequence
is sent to an unknown device at that address.
