.\"	$OpenBSD: cz.4,v 1.13 2018/03/16 16:58:26 schwarze Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: cz.4,v 1.3 2001/06/12 14:46:11 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Zembu Labs, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Author: Jason R. Thorpe <thorpej@zembu.com>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by Zembu Labs, Inc.
.\" 4. Neither the name of Zembu Labs nor the names of its employees may
.\"    be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY ZEMBU LABS, INC. ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS
.\" OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WAR-
.\" RANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DIS-
.\" CLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL ZEMBU LABS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 16 2018 $
.Dt CZ 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cz
.Nd Cyclades-Z series multi-port serial adapter device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "cz* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports the Cyclades-Z series of multi-port serial adapters.
The Cyclades-Z is an intelligent serial controller comprising:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
PLX9060ES PCI bus interface
.It
Xilinx XC5204 FPGA
.It
IDT R3052 MIPS CPU
.El
.Pp
The MIPS CPU runs firmware provided by the device driver.
Communication with the MIPS is performed by modifying data structures located
in board local RAM or host RAM.
.Pp
The Cyclades-Z comes in three basic flavors:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Cyclades-8Zo rev. 1 \(em This is an older 8-port board with no FPGA.
The serial ports are provided by an octopus cable.
.It
Cyclades-8Zo rev. 2 \(em This is the newer 8-port board.
The serial ports are provided by an octopus cable.
.It
Cyclades-Ze \(em This is the expandable version of the Cyclades-Z.
It uses an HD-50 SCSI cable to connect the board to a 1U rack mountable serial
expansion box.
Each box has 16 RJ45 serial ports, and up to 4 boxes may be chained together,
for a total of 64 ports.
Boxes 3 and 4 require their own external power supply, otherwise the firmware
will refuse to start (as it cannot communicate with the UARTs in those boxes).
.El
.Pp
The Cyclades-Z has several features to improve performance under
high serial I/O load:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
The board may operate in interrupt-driven mode or polled mode to reduce
interrupt load.
.It
Each channel has a large input and output buffer.
.It
Each channel may be programmed to generate an interrupt based on
reception of a specific character, e.g. a PPP End-Of-Frame character.
.It
The MIPS CPU on the board performs all flow-control handling.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXXXXXXX -compact
.It Pa /dev/ttyZ??
dial-in (normal) TTY device
.It Pa /dev/cuaZ??
dial-out TTY device
.El
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" XXX to be done.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr termios 4 ,
.Xr tty 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jason R. Thorpe Aq Mt thorpej@zembu.com
and
.An Bill Studenmund Aq Mt wrstuden@zembu.com
of Zembu Labs, Inc.
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver does not currently implement communication via host RAM.
While this may improve performance by reducing the number of PCI memory
space read/write cycles, it is not straightforward to implement with
the current
.Xr bus_dma 9
API.
.Pp
Interrupt mode has not been tested.
.Pp
There is no support for reading or writing the EEPROM connected to
the PLX PCI bus controller.
