.\" $OpenBSD: drm.4,v 1.13 2022/01/07 00:44:17 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Jason McIntyre <jmc@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 7 2022 $
.Dt DRM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm drm ,
.Nm inteldrm ,
.Nm radeondrm
.Nd Direct Rendering Manager device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "# amd64"
.Cd "amdgpu* at pci?"
.Cd "drm0 at amdgpu? primary 1"
.Cd "drm* at amdgpu?"
.Cd "wsdisplay0 at amdgpu? primary 1"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at amdgpu? mux -1"
.Pp
.Cd "# arm64"
.Cd "amdgpu* at pci?"
.Cd "drm* at amdgpu?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at amdgpu?"
.Pp
.Cd "# amd64, i386"
.Cd "inteldrm* at pci?"
.Cd "intagp* at inteldrm?"
.Cd "agp* at intagp?"
.Cd "drm0 at inteldrm? primary 1"
.Cd "drm* at inteldrm?"
.Cd "wsdisplay0 at inteldrm? primary 1"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at inteldrm? mux -1"
.Pp
.Cd "# amd64, i386"
.Cd "radeondrm* at pci?"
.Cd "drm0 at radeondrm? primary 1"
.Cd "drm* at radeondrm?"
.Cd "wsdisplay0 at radeondrm? primary 1"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at radeondrm? mux -1"
.Pp
.Cd "# arm64, loongson, macppc, powerpc64, riscv64, sparc64"
.Cd "radeondrm* at pci?"
.Cd "drm* at radeondrm?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at radeondrm?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for hardware accelerated video
using the Direct Rendering Infrastructure (DRI).
.Nm
provides kernel support for DRI,
and is used in conjunction with the
.Xr X 7
DRI module.
.Pp
Support is currently available for the following graphics cards:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "radeon(4)XXX" -offset indent -compact
.It Xr amdgpu 4
AMD Radeon GPUs using the amdgpu kernel driver
.It Xr intel 4
Intel integrated graphics chipsets
.It Xr radeon 4
ATI/AMD Radeon video driver
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/usr/X11R6/lib/modules/dri/X_dri.so" -compact
.It Pa /dev/dri/card*
DRM primary node files.
.It Pa /dev/dri/renderD*
DRM render node files.
.It Pa /usr/X11R6/lib/modules/dri/*_dri.so
X DRI modules.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vga 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.3 .
