.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Luiz Otavio O Souza <loos@freebsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 12, 2016
.Dt DS3231 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ds3231
.Nd Extremely Accurate i2c-integrated RTC/TCXO/Crystal
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device iic"
.Cd "device iicbus"
.Cd "device ds3231"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is a low-cost, extremely accurate I2C realtime clock (RTC) with an
integrated temperature-compensated crystal oscillator (TCXO) and crystal.
.Pp
The device incorporates a battery input and maintains accurate timekeeping
when main power to the device is interrupted.
.Pp
Access to
.Nm
data is made with the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface:
.Bd -literal
dev.ds3231.0.%desc: Maxim DS3231 RTC
dev.ds3231.0.%driver: ds3231
dev.ds3231.0.%location: addr=0xd0
dev.ds3231.0.%pnpinfo: name=rtc compat=maxim,ds3231
dev.ds3231.0.%parent: iicbus1
dev.ds3231.0.temperature: 23.2C
dev.ds3231.0.temp_conv: 0
dev.ds3231.0.bbsqw: 0
dev.ds3231.0.sqw_freq: 8192
dev.ds3231.0.sqw_mode: interrupt
dev.ds3231.0.32khz_enable: 1
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width ".Va dev.ds3231.%d.temperature"
.It Va dev.ds3231.%d.temperature
The read-only value of the current temperature read by the RTC.
.It Va dev.ds3231.%d.temp_conv
Start a new temperature conversion.
When read as 1, a temperature conversion is in progress.
When read as 0 and then set to 1, a temperature conversion is started.
The temperature conversion runs automatically on power up and once every 64
seconds afterward.
.It Va dev.ds3231.%d.bbsqw
If set to 1 and
.Va dev.ds3231.%d.sqw_mode
is set to square-wave, battery-backed square-wave output is enabled.
If set to 0, the SQW pin will be set to high impendance when the RTC is
being powered by battery.
.It Va dev.ds3231.%d.sqw_freq
Select the frequency of the SQW pin when the square-wave output is enabled on
.Va dev.ds3231.%d.sqw_mode .
It can be set to 1, 1024, 4096, and 8192.
.It Va dev.ds3231.%d.sqw_mode
Set the operation mode for the SQW pin.
It can be set to 'interrupt' (default) or 'square-wave'.
In interrupt mode, the SQW pin is used to generate interrupts for the RTC
alarms.
In square-wave mode, the SQW pin drives a square-wave of
.Va dev.ds3231.%d.sqw_freq
frequency.
.It Va dev.ds3231.%d.32khz_enable
Enable the 32kHz output.
.El
.Pp
Please check the
.Nm
datasheet for more details.
.Pp
On a
.Xr device.hints 5
based system, such as
.Li MIPS ,
these values are configurable for
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width ".Va hint.ds3231.%d.addr"
.It Va hint.ds3231.%d.at
The
.Xr iicbus 4
that the
.Nm
is connected to.
.It Va hint.ds3231.%d.addr
The 8-bit i2c address of
.Nm .
The default 8-bit address for
.Nm
is 0xd0.
.El
.Pp
On a
.Xr FDT 4
based system the following properties must be set:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va compatible"
.It Va compatible
Must always be set to "maxim,ds3231".
.It Va reg
The 7-bit i2c address of
.Nm .
The default 7-bit address for
.Nm
is 0x68.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fdt 4 ,
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr iicbus 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Luiz Otavio O Souza Aq Mt loos@FreeBSD.org .
