.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Mark Johnston <markj@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 14, 2015
.Dt DTRACE_IP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dtrace_ip
.Nd a DTrace provider for tracing events related to the IPv4 and IPv6 protocols
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fn ip:::receive "pktinfo_t *" "csinfo_t *" "ipinfo_t *" "ifinfo_t *" \
    "ipv4info_t *" "ipv6info_t *"
.Fn ip:::send "pktinfo_t *" "csinfo_t *" "ipinfo_t *" "ifinfo_t *" \
    "ipv4info_t *" "ipv6info_t *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The DTrace
.Nm ip
provider allows users to trace events in the
.Xr ip 4
and
.Xr ip6 4
protocol implementations.
The
.Fn ip:::send
probe fires whenever the kernel prepares to transmit an IP packet, and the
.Fn ip:::receive
probe fires whenever the kernel receives an IP packet.
The arguments to these probes can be used to obtain detailed information about
the IP headers of the corresponding packet, as well as the network interface on
which the packet was sent or received.
Unlike the
.Xr dtrace_tcp 4
and
.Xr dtrace_udp 4
providers,
.Nm ip
provider probes are triggered by forwarded packets.
That is, the probes will fire on packets that are not destined to the local
host.
.Sh ARGUMENTS
The
.Vt pktinfo_t
argument is currently unimplemented and is included for compatibility with other
implementations of this provider.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uintptr_t pkt_addr" -offset indent
.It Vt uintptr_t pkt_addr
Always set to 0.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt csinfo_t
argument is currently unimplemented and is included for compatibility with other
implementations of this provider.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uintptr_t cs_addr" -offset indent
.It Vt uintptr_t cs_addr
Always set to 0.
.It Vt uint64_t cs_cid
A pointer to the
.Vt struct inpcb
for this packet, or
.Dv NULL .
.It Vt pid_t cs_pid
Always set to 0.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt ipinfo_t
argument contains IP fields common to both IPv4 and IPv6 packets.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uint32_t ip_plength" -offset indent
.It Vt uint8_t ip_ver
IP version of the packet, 4 for IPv4 packets and 6 for IPv6 packets.
.It Vt uint32_t ip_plength
IP payload size.
This does not include the size of the IP header or IPv6 option headers.
.It Vt string ip_saddr
IP source address.
.It Vt string ip_daddr
IP destination address.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt ifinfo_t
argument describes the outgoing and incoming interfaces for the packet in the
.Fn ip:::send
and
.Fn ip:::receive
probes respectively.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uintptr_t if_addr" -offset indent
.It Vt string if_name
The interface name.
.It Vt int8_t if_local
A boolean value indicating whether or not the interface is a loopback interface.
.It Vt uintptr_t if_addr
A pointer to the
.Vt struct ifnet
which describes the interface.
See the
.Xr ifnet 9
manual page.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt ipv4info_t
argument contains the fields of the IP header for IPv4 packets.
This argument is
.Dv NULL
for IPv6 packets.
DTrace scripts should use the
.Fn ip_ver
field in the
.Vt ipinfo_t
argument to determine whether to use this argument.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uint16_t ipv4_checksum" -offset indent
.It Vt uint8_t ipv4_ver
IP version.
This will always be 4 for IPv4 packets.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv4_ihl
The IP header length, including options, in 32-bit words.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv4_tos
IP type of service field.
.It Vt uint16_t ipv4_length
The total packet length, including the header, in bytes.
.It Vt uint16_t ipv4_ident
Identification field.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv4_flags
The IP flags.
.It Vt uint16_t ipv4_offset
The fragment offset of the packet.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv4_ttl
Time to live field.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv4_protocol
Next-level protocol ID.
.It Vt string ipv4_protostr
A string containing the name of the encapsulated protocol.
The protocol strings are defined in the
.Va protocol
array in
.Pa /usr/lib/dtrace/ip.d
.It Vt uint16_t ipv4_checksum
The IP checksum.
.It Vt ipaddr_t ipv4_src
IPv4 source address.
.It Vt ipaddr_t ipv4_dst
IPv4 destination address.
.It Vt string ipv4_saddr
A string representation of the source address.
.It Vt string ipv4_daddr
A string representation of the destination address.
.It Vt ipha_t *ipv4_hdr
A pointer to the raw IPv4 header.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt ipv6info_t
argument contains the fields of the IP header for IPv6 packets.
Its fields are not set for IPv4 packets; as with the
.Vt ipv4info_t
argument, the
.Fn ip_ver
field should be used to determine whether this argument is valid.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uint16_t ipv4_checksum" -offset indent
.It Vt uint8_t ipv6_ver
IP version.
This will always be 6 for IPv6 packets.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv6_tclass
The traffic class, used to set the differentiated services codepoint and
extended congestion notification flags.
.It Vt uint32_t ipv6_flow
The flow label of the packet.
.It Vt uint16_t ipv6_plen
The IP payload size, including extension headers, in bytes.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv6_nexthdr
An identifier for the type of the next header.
.It Vt string ipv6_nextstr
A string representation of the type of the next header.
.It Vt uint8_t ipv6_hlim
The hop limit.
.It Vt ip6_addr_t *ipv6_src
IPv6 source address.
.It Vt ip6_addr_t *ipv6_dst
IPv6 destination address.
.It Vt string ipv6_saddr
A string representation of the source address.
.It Vt string ipv6_daddr
A string representation of the destination address.
.It Vt struct ip6_hdr *ipv6_hdr
A pointer to the raw IPv6 header.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/usr/lib/dtrace/ip.d" -compact
.It Pa /usr/lib/dtrace/ip.d
DTrace type and translator definitions for the
.Nm ip
provider.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following script counts received packets by remote host address.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ip:::receive
{
        @num[args[2]->ip_saddr] = count();
}
.Ed
.Pp
This script will print some details of each IP packet as it is sent or received
by the kernel:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#pragma D option quiet
#pragma D option switchrate=10Hz

dtrace:::BEGIN
{
        printf(" %10s %30s    %-30s %8s %6s\\n", "DELTA(us)", "SOURCE",
            "DEST", "INT", "BYTES");
        last = timestamp;
}

ip:::send
{
        this->elapsed = (timestamp - last) / 1000;
        printf(" %10d %30s -> %-30s %8s %6d\\n", this->elapsed,
            args[2]->ip_saddr, args[2]->ip_daddr, args[3]->if_name,
            args[2]->ip_plength);
        last = timestamp;
}

ip:::receive
{
        this->elapsed = (timestamp - last) / 1000;
        printf(" %10d %30s <- %-30s %8s %6d\\n", this->elapsed,
            args[2]->ip_daddr, args[2]->ip_saddr, args[3]->if_name,
            args[2]->ip_plength);
        last = timestamp;
}
.Ed
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
This provider is compatible with the
.Nm ip
providers found in Solaris and Darwin.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dtrace 1 ,
.Xr dtrace_tcp 4 ,
.Xr dtrace_udp 4 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr ip6 4 ,
.Xr ifnet 9 ,
.Xr SDT 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ip
provider first appeared in
.Fx
10.0.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Mark Johnston Aq Mt markj@FreeBSD.org .
