.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Mark Johnston <markj@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 1, 2018
.Dt DTRACE_UDP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dtrace_udp
.Nd a DTrace provider for tracing events related to the UDP protocol
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fn udp:::receive "pktinfo_t *" "csinfo_t *" "ipinfo_t *" "udpsinfo_t *" \
    "udpinfo_t *"
.Fn udp:::send "pktinfo_t *" "csinfo_t *" "ipinfo_t *" "udpsinfo_t *" \
    "udpinfo_t *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The DTrace
.Nm udp
provider allows users to trace events in the
.Xr udp 4
protocol implementation.
The
.Fn udp:::send
probe fires whenever the kernel prepares to transmit a UDP packet, and the
.Fn udp:::receive
probe fires whenever the kernel receives a UDP packet, unless
the UDP header is incomplete,
the destination port is 0,
the length field is invalid,
or the checksum is wrong.
The arguments to these probes can be used to obtain detailed information about
the IP and UDP headers of the corresponding packet.
.Sh ARGUMENTS
The
.Vt pktinfo_t
argument is currently unimplemented and is included for compatibility with other
implementations of this provider.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uintptr_t pkt_addr" -offset indent
.It Vt uintptr_t pkt_addr
Always set to 0.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt csinfo_t
argument is currently unimplemented and is included for compatibility with other
implementations of this provider.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uintptr_t cs_addr" -offset indent
.It Vt uintptr_t cs_addr
Always set to 0.
.It Vt uint64_t cs_cid
A pointer to the
.Vt struct inpcb
for this packet, or
.Dv NULL .
.It Vt pid_t cs_pid
Always set to 0.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt ipinfo_t
argument contains IP fields common to both IPv4 and IPv6 packets.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uint32_t ip_plength" -offset indent
.It Vt uint8_t ip_ver
IP version of the packet, 4 for IPv4 packets and 6 for IPv6 packets.
.It Vt uint32_t ip_plength
IP payload size.
This does not include the size of the IP header or IPv6 option headers.
.It Vt string ip_saddr
IP source address.
.It Vt string ip_daddr
IP destination address.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt udpsinfo_t
argument contains the state of the UDP connection associated with the packet.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "uintptr_t udps_addr" -offset indent
.It Vt uintptr_t udps_addr
Pointer to the
.Vt struct inpcb
containing the IP state for the associated socket.
.It Vt uint16_t udps_lport
Local UDP port.
.It Vt uint16_t udps_rport
Remote UDP port.
.It Vt string udps_laddr
Local IPv4 or IPv6 address.
.It Vt string udps_raddr
Remote IPv4 or IPv6 address.
.El
.Pp
The
.Vt udpinfo_t
argument is the raw UDP header of the packet, with all fields in host order.
Its fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "struct udphdr *udp_hdr" -offset indent
.It Vt uint16_t udp_sport
Source UDP port.
.It Vt uint16_t udp_dport
Destination UDP port.
.It Vt uint16_t udp_length
Length of the UDP header and payload, in bytes.
.It Vt uint16_t udp_checksum
A checksum of the UDP header and payload, or 0 if no checksum was calculated.
.It Vt struct udphdr *udp_hdr
A pointer to the raw UDP header.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/usr/lib/dtrace/udp.d" -compact
.It Pa /usr/lib/dtrace/udp.d
DTrace type and translator definitions for the
.Nm udp
provider.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following script counts transmitted packets by destination port.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
udp:::send
{
        @num[args[4]->udp_dport] = count();
}
.Ed
.Pp
This script will print some details of each UDP packet as it is sent or received
by the kernel:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#pragma D option quiet
#pragma D option switchrate=10Hz

dtrace:::BEGIN
{
        printf(" %10s %36s    %-36s %6s\\n", "DELTA(us)", "SOURCE",
            "DEST", "BYTES");
        last = timestamp;
}

udp:::send
{
        this->elapsed = (timestamp - last) / 1000;
        self->dest = strjoin(strjoin(args[2]->ip_daddr, ":"),
             lltostr(args[4]->udp_dport));
        printf(" %10d %30s:%-5d -> %-36s %6d\\n", this->elapsed,
            args[2]->ip_saddr, args[4]->udp_sport,
            self->dest, args[4]->udp_length);
        last = timestamp;
}

udp:::receive
{
        this->elapsed = (timestamp - last) / 1000;
        self->dest = strjoin(strjoin(args[2]->ip_saddr, ":"),
             lltostr(args[4]->udp_sport));
        printf(" %10d %30s:%-5d <- %-36s %6d\\n", this->elapsed,
            args[2]->ip_daddr, args[4]->udp_dport,
            self->dest, args[4]->udp_length);
        last = timestamp;
}
.Ed
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
This provider is compatible with the
.Nm udp
provider in Solaris.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dtrace 1 ,
.Xr dtrace_ip 4 ,
.Xr dtrace_sctp 4 ,
.Xr dtrace_tcp 4 ,
.Xr dtrace_udplite 4 ,
.Xr udp 4 ,
.Xr SDT 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm udp
provider first appeared in
.Fx
10.0.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Mark Johnston Aq Mt markj@FreeBSD.org .
