.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Mark Johnston <markj@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 18, 2015
.Dt DTRACE_SCHED 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dtrace_sched
.Nd a DTrace provider for tracing CPU scheduling events
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fn sched:::change-pri "struct thread *" "struct proc *" "uint8_t"
.Fn sched:::dequeue "struct thread *" "struct proc *" "void *"
.Fn sched:::enqueue "struct thread *" "struct proc *" "void *" "int"
.Fn sched:::lend-pri "struct thread *" "struct proc *" "uint8_t" "struct thread *"
.Fn sched:::load-change "int" "int"
.Fn sched:::off-cpu "struct thread *" "struct proc *"
.Fn sched:::on-cpu
.Fn sched:::preempt
.Fn sched:::remain-cpu
.Fn sched:::surrender "struct thread *" "struct proc *"
.Fn sched:::sleep
.Fn sched:::tick "struct thread *" "struct proc *"
.Fn sched:::wakeup "struct thread *" "struct proc *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The DTrace
.Nm sched
provider allows the tracing of events related to CPU scheduling in the 4BSD and
ULE schedulers.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::change-pri
probe fires when a thread's active scheduling priority is about to be updated.
The first two arguments are the thread whose priority is about to be changed,
and the corresponding process.
The third argument is the new absolute priority for the thread, while the
current value is given by
.Dv args[0]->td_priority .
The
.Fn sched:::lend-pri
probe fires when the currently-running thread elevates the priority of another
thread via priority lending.
The first two arguments are the thread whose priority is about to be changed,
and the corresponding process.
The third argument is the new absolute priority for the thread.
The fourth argument is the currently-running thread.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::dequeue
probe fires immediately before a runnable thread is removed from a scheduler
run queue.
This may occur when the thread is about to begin execution on a CPU, or because
the thread is being migrated to a different run queue.
The latter event may occur in several circumstances: the scheduler may be
attempting to rebalance load between multiple CPUs, the thread's scheduling
priority may have changed, or the thread's CPU affinity settings may have
changed.
The first two arguments to
.Fn sched:::dequeue
are the thread and corresponding process.
The third argument is currently always
.Dv NULL .
The
.Fn sched:::enqueue
probe fires when a runnable thread is about to be added to a scheduler run
queue.
Its first two arguments are the thread and corresponding process.
The third argument is currently always
.Dv NULL .
The fourth argument is a boolean value that is non-zero if the thread is
enqueued at the beginning of its run queue slot, and zero if the thread is
instead enqueued at the end.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::load-change
probe fires after the load of a thread queue is adjusted.
The first argument is the cpuid for the CPU associated with the thread queue,
and the second argument is the adjusted load of the thread queue, i.e., the
number of elements in the queue.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::off-cpu
probe is triggered by the scheduler suspending execution of the
currently-running thread, and the
.Fn sched:::on-cpu
probe fires when the current thread has been selected to run on a CPU and is
about to begin or resume execution.
The arguments to
.Fn sched:::off-cpu
are the thread and corresponding process selected to run following the
currently-running thread.
If these two threads are the same, the
.Fn sched:::remain-cpu
probe will fire instead.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::surrender
probe fires when the scheduler is called upon to make a scheduling decision by
a thread running on a different CPU, via an interprocessor interrupt.
The arguments to this probe are the interrupted thread and its corresponding
process.
This probe currently always fires in the context of the interrupted thread.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::preempt
probe will fire immediately before the currently-running thread is preempted.
When this occurs, the scheduler will select a new thread to run, and one of the
.Fn sched:::off-cpu
or
.Fn sched:::remain-cpu
probes will subsequently fire, depending on whether or not the scheduler selects
the preempted thread.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::sleep
probe fires immediately before the currently-running thread is about to suspend
execution and begin waiting for a condition to be met.
The
.Fn sched:::wakeup
probe fires when a thread is set up to resume execution after having gone to
sleep.
Its arguments are the thread being awoken, and the corresponding process.
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::tick
fires before each scheduler clock tick.
Its arguments are the currently-running thread and its corresponding process.
.Sh ARGUMENTS
The
.Nm sched
provider probes use the kernel types
.Vt "struct proc"
and
.Vt "struct thread"
to represent processes and threads, respectively.
These structures have many fields and are defined in
.Pa sys/proc.h .
In a probe body, the currently-running thread can always be obtained with the
.Va curthread
global variable, which has type
.Vt "struct thread *" .
For example, when a running thread is about to sleep, the
.Fn sched:::sleep
probe fires in the context of that thread, which can be accessed using
.Va curthread .
The
.Va curcpu
global variable contains the cpuid of the CPU on which the currently-running
thread is executing.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following script gives a breakdown of CPU utilization by process name:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sched:::on-cpu
{
        self->ts = timestamp;
}

sched:::off-cpu
/self->ts != 0/
{
        @[execname] = sum((timestamp - self->ts) / 1000);
        self->ts = 0;
}
.Ed
.Pp
Here, DTrace stores a timestamp each time a thread is scheduled to run, and
computes the time elapsed in microseconds when it is descheduled.
The results are summed by process name.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
This provider is not compatible with the
.Nm sched
provider found in Solaris.
In particular, the probe argument types are native
.Fx
types, and the
.Fn sched:::cpucaps-sleep ,
.Fn sched:::cpucaps-wakeup ,
.Fn sched:::schedctl-nopreempt ,
.Fn sched:::schedctl-preempt ,
and
.Fn sched:::schedctl-yield
probes are not available in
.Fx .
.Pp
The
.Fn sched:::lend-pri
and
.Fn sched:::load-change
probes are specific to
.Fx .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dtrace 1 ,
.Xr sched_4bsd 4 ,
.Xr sched_ule 4 ,
.Xr SDT 9 ,
.Xr sleepqueue 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm sched
provider first appeared in
.Fx
8.4 and 9.1.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Mark Johnston Aq Mt markj@FreeBSD.org .
