.\"	$OpenBSD: dwmshc.4,v 1.1 2023/04/19 00:07:21 dlg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 David Gwynne <dlg@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: April 19 2023 $
.Dt DWMSHC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dwmshc
.Nd Synopsys DesignWare Mobile Storage Host Controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "dwmshc* at fdt?"
.Cd "sdmmc* at dwmshc?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Synopsys DesignWare Mobile Storage
Host Controller core.
This core is used on the Rockchip RK3566 and RK3568
.\" and RK3588
SoCs as the eMMC controller.
.Pp
The Synopsys DesignWare Mobile Storage Host Controller core implements
the SD Host Controller Standard Simplified Specification, but
requires non-standard support for high clock rates.
.\" The
.\" .Nm
.\" driver is a wrapper around the
.\" .Xr sdhc 4
.\" driver.
.Pp
The
.Xr sdmmc 4
subsystem performs SD/MMC transactions to communicate with the
MMC/SD/SDIO devices connected to the controller.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sdhc 4 ,
.Xr sdmmc 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 7.4 .
