.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Hiroki Mori
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 5, 2017
.Dt E6060SW 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm e6060sw
.Nd driver for Marvell 88E6060 and 88E6065 fast ethernet switch chip
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device mdio"
.Cd "device etherswitch"
.Cd "device e6060sw"
.Pp
.Cd hint.e6060sw.0.at="mdio0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides a management interface to Marvell 88E6060 and 88E6065 fast ethernet switch chip.
This driver use smi interface by ethernet interface.
.Pp
88E6060 support is only port vlan.
88E6065 support is port and dot1q vlan.
dot1q support group base tag/untag.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Configure dot1q vlan on 88E6065 by etherswitchcfg command.
.Pp
.Dl # etherswitchcfg config vlan_mode dot1q
.Pp
Configure vlangroup with dot1q tag on 88E6065.
This example is port0 as vlan 2.
.Pp
.Dl # etherswitchcfg vlangroup2 vlan 2 members 0,5t port0 pvid 2
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr etherswitch 4 ,
.Xr etherswitchcfg 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Hiroki Mori
