.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994, David Greenman
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by David Greenman.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2018
.Dt ED 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ed
.Nd "NE-2000 and WD-80x3 Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device ed"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ed_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for 8 and 16bit Ethernet cards that are based on
the National Semiconductor DS8390 and similar NICs manufactured by
other companies.
The
.Nm
driver also supports many PC Card chips which interface via MII to a PHY.
Axiom's AX88790, AX88190 and AX88190A;
DLink's DL10019 and DL10022; and
Tamarack's TC5299J chips all support internal or external MII/PHY combinations.
Realtek's PCI and ISA RTL80x9-based cards are also supported.
For these chipsets, autonegotiation and status reporting are supported.
.Pp
In addition to the standard port and IRQ specifications, the
.Nm
driver also supports a number of
.Cd flags
which can force 8/16bit mode, enable/disable multi-buffering, and select the default
interface type (AUI/BNC, and for cards with twisted pair, AUI/10BaseT).
.Pp
The
.Cd flags
are a bit field, and are summarized as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Li 0x01
Disable transceiver.
On those cards which support it, this flag causes the transceiver to
be disabled and the AUI connection to be used by default.
.It Li 0x02
Force 8bit mode.
This flag forces the card to 8bit mode regardless of how the
card identifies itself.
This may be needed for some clones which incorrectly
identify themselves as 16bit, even though they only have an 8bit interface.
This flag takes precedence over force 16bit mode.
.It Li 0x04
Force 16bit mode.
This flag forces the card to 16bit mode regardless of how the
card identifies itself.
This may be needed for some clones which incorrectly
identify themselves as 8bit, even though they have a 16bit ISA interface.
.It Li 0x08
Disable transmitter multi-buffering.
This flag disables the use of multiple
transmit buffers and may be necessary in rare cases where packets are sent out
faster than a machine on the other end can handle (as evidenced by severe packet
lossage).
Some
.No ( non- Ns Fx
:-)) machines have terrible Ethernet performance
and simply cannot cope with 1100K+ data rates.
Use of this flag also provides
one more packet worth of receiver buffering, and on 8bit cards, this may help
reduce receiver lossage.
.El
.Pp
When using a 3c503 card, the AUI connection may be selected by specifying the
.Cm link2
option to
.Xr ifconfig 8
(BNC is the default).
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following Ethernet NICs:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3Com 3c503 Etherlink II
.Pq Cd "options ED_3C503"
.It
AR-P500 Ethernet
.It
Accton EN1644 (old model), EN1646 (old model), EN2203 (old model) (110pin)
(flags 0xd00000)
.It
Accton EN2212/EN2216/UE2216
.It
Allied Telesis CentreCOM LA100-PCM_V2
.It
AmbiCom 10BaseT card (8002, 8002T, 8010 and 8610)
.It
Bay Networks NETGEAR FA410TXC Fast Ethernet
.It
Belkin F5D5020 PC Card Fast Ethernet
.It
Billionton LM5LT-10B Ethernet/Modem PC Card
.It
Billionton LNT-10TB, LNT-10TN Ethernet PC Card
.It
Bromax iPort 10/100 Ethernet PC Card
.It
Bromax iPort 10 Ethernet PC Card
.It
Buffalo LPC2-CLT, LPC3-CLT, LPC3-CLX, LPC4-TX, LPC-CTX PC Card
.It
Buffalo LPC-CF-CLT CF Card
.It
CNet BC40 adapter
.It
Compex Net-A adapter
.It
Compex RL2000
.It
Corega Ether PCC-T/EtherII PCC-T/FEther PCC-TXF/PCC-TXD PCC-T/Fether II TXD
.It
Corega LAPCCTXD (TC5299J)
.It
CyQ've ELA-010
.It
DEC EtherWorks DE305
.It
Danpex EN-6200P2
.It
D-Link DE-660, DE-660+
.It
D-Link IC-CARD/IC-CARD+ Ethernet
.It
ELECOM Laneed LD-CDL/TX, LD-CDF, LD-CDS, LD-10/100CD, LD-CDWA (DP83902A)
.It
Hawking PN652TX PC Card (AX88790)
.It
HP PC Lan+ 27247B and 27252A
.Pq Cd "options ED_HPP"
.It
IBM Creditcard Ethernet I/II
.It
I-O DATA ET2/T-PCI
.It
I-O DATA PCLATE
.It
Kingston KNE-PC2, CIO10T, KNE-PCM/x Ethernet
.It
KTI ET32P2 PCI
.It
Linksys EC2T/PCMPC100/PCM100, PCMLM56
.It
Linksys EtherFast 10/100 PC Card, Combo PCMCIA Ethernet Card (PCMPC100 V2)
.It
MACNICA Ethernet ME1 for JEIDA
.It
MELCO LGY-PCI-TR
.It
MELCO LPC-T/LPC2-T/LPC2-CLT/LPC2-TX/LPC3-TX/LPC3-CLX
.It
NDC Ethernet Instant-Link
.It
National Semiconductor InfoMover NE4100
.It
NetGear FA-410TX
.It
NetVin NV5000SC
.It
Network Everywhere Ethernet 10BaseT PC Card
.It
New Media LANSurfer 10+56 Ethernet/Modem
.It
New Media LANSurfer
.It
Novell NE1000/NE2000/NE2100
.It
PLANEX ENW-8300-T
.It
PLANEX FNW-3600-T
.It
Psion 10/100 LANGLOBAL Combine iT
.It
RealTek 8019
.It
RealTek 8029
.It
Relia Combo-L/M-56k PC Card
.It
SMC Elite 16 WD8013
.It
SMC Elite Ultra
.It
SMC WD8003E/WD8003EBT/WD8003S/WD8003SBT/WD8003W/WD8013EBT/WD8013W and clones
.It
SMC EZCard PC Card, 8040-TX, 8041-TX (AX88x90), 8041-TX V.2 (TC5299J)
.It
Socket LP-E, ES-1000 Ethernet/Serial, LP-E CF, LP-FE CF
.It
Surecom EtherPerfect EP-427
.It
Surecom NE-34
.It
TDK 3000/3400/5670 Fast Ethernet/Modem
.It
TDK LAK-CD031, Grey Cell GCS2000 Ethernet Card
.It
TDK DFL5610WS Ethernet/Modem PC Card
.It
Telecom Device SuperSocket RE450T
.It
Toshiba LANCT00A PC Card
.It
VIA VT86C926
.It
Winbond W89C940
.It
Winbond W89C940F
.El
.Pp
ISA, PCI and PC Card devices are supported.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver does not support the following Ethernet NICs:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Mitsubishi LAN Adapter B8895
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ed%d: failed to clear shared memory at %x - check configuration."
When the card was probed at system boot time, the
.Nm
driver found that it could not clear the card's shared memory.
This is most commonly
caused by a BIOS extension ROM being configured in the same address space as the
Ethernet card's shared memory.
Either find the offending card and change its BIOS
ROM to be at an address that does not conflict, or change the
settings in
.Xr device.hints 5
that the card's shared memory is mapped at a
non-conflicting address.
.It "ed%d: Invalid irq configuration (%d) must be 2-5 for 3c503."
The IRQ number that was specified in the
.Xr device.hints 5
file is not valid for the 3Com 3c503 card.
The 3c503 can only be assigned to IRQs 2 through 5.
.It "ed%d: Cannot find start of RAM."
.It "ed%d: Cannot find any RAM, start : %d, x = %d."
The probe of a Gateway card was unsuccessful in configuring the card's packet memory.
This likely indicates that the card was improperly recognized as a Gateway or that
the card is defective.
.It "ed: packets buffered, but transmitter idle."
Indicates a logic problem in the driver.
Should never happen.
.It "ed%d: device timeout"
Indicates that an expected transmitter interrupt did not occur.
Usually caused by an
interrupt conflict with another card on the ISA bus.
This condition could also be caused if the kernel is configured for a
different IRQ channel than the one the card is actually using.
If that is the case, you will have to either reconfigure the card
using a DOS utility or set the jumpers on the card appropriately.
.It "ed%d: NIC memory corrupt - invalid packet length %d."
Indicates that a packet was received with a packet length that was either larger than
the maximum size or smaller than the minimum size allowed by the IEEE 802.3 standard.
Usually
caused by a conflict with another card on the ISA bus, but in some cases may also
indicate faulty cabling.
.It "ed%d: remote transmit DMA failed to complete."
This indicates that a programmed I/O transfer to an NE1000 or NE2000 style card
has failed to properly complete.
Usually caused by the ISA bus speed being set
too fast.
.It "ed%d: Invalid irq configuration (%ld) must be %s for %s"
Indicates the device has a different IRQ than supported or expected.
.It "ed%d: Cannot locate my ports!"
The device is using a different I/O port than the driver knows about.
.It "ed%d: Cannot extract MAC address"
Attempts to get the MAC address failed.
.It "ed%d: Missing mii!"
Probing for an MII bus has failed.
This indicates a coding error in the PC Card attachment, because a PHY
is required for the chips that generate this error message.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr device.hints 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 1.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver and this manual page were written by
.An David Greenman .
.Sh CAVEATS
Early revision DS8390 chips have problems.
They lock up whenever the receive
ring-buffer overflows.
They occasionally switch the byte order
of the length field in the packet ring header (several different causes
of this related to an off-by-one byte alignment) - resulting in
.Qq Li "NIC memory corrupt - invalid packet length"
messages.
The card is reset
whenever these problems occur, but otherwise there is no problem with
recovering from these conditions.
.Pp
The NIC memory access to 3Com and Novell cards is much slower than it is on
WD/SMC cards; it is less than 1MB/second on 8bit boards and less than 2MB/second
on the 16bit cards.
This can lead to ring-buffer overruns resulting in
dropped packets during heavy network traffic.
.Pp
The Mitsubishi B8895 PC Card uses a DP83902, but its ASIC part is
undocumented.
Neither the NE2000 nor the WD83x0 drivers work with this card.
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver is a bit too aggressive about resetting the card whenever any bad
packets are received.
As a result, it may throw out some good packets which
have been received but not yet transferred from the card to main memory.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver is slow by today's standards.
.Pp
PC Card attachment supports the D-Link DMF650TX LAN/Modem card's Ethernet
port only at this time.
.Pp
Some devices supported by
.Nm
do not generate the link state change events used by
.Xr devd 8
to start
.Xr dhclient 8 .
If you have problems with
.Xr dhclient 8
not starting and the device is always attached to the network it may
be possible to work around this by changing
.Dq Li DHCP
to
.Dq Li SYNCDHCP
in the
.Va ifconfig_ed0
entry in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf .
