.\"	$OpenBSD: emu.4,v 1.18 2013/07/16 16:05:48 schwarze Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: emuxki.4,v 1.1 2001/10/18 18:40:16 jdolecek Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt EMU 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm emu
.Nd Creative Labs SBLive!, PCI 512, and Audigy audio device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "emu* at pci?"
.Cd "audio* at emu?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports Creative Labs SoundBlaster Live!,
Sound Blaster PCI 512,
and SoundBlaster Audigy cards.
.Pp
These Environmental Audio cards are based upon the programmable EMU10K1
digital-processing chip.
.Pp
Hardware features:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
E-mu Systems, Inc. EMU10K1 music synthesis engine
.It
64-voice hardware polyphony with E-mu's patented 8-point interpolation
technology
.It
Up to 1024-voice polyphony with multi-timbre capability
.It
Support for real-time digital effects like reverb, chorus, flanger, pitch
shifter, or distortion across any audio source
.It
User-selectable settings are optimized for headphones, two or four speakers
.It
Processes sample rates from 5kHz to 48kHz
.It
Creative Multi Speaker Surround (CMSS) places any mono or stereo sound
source in a 360 degree audio space
.It
Hardware full-duplex support enables simultaneous record and playback
at 8 standard sample rates
.It
Allows multiple audio sources playback on the same speaker system
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ac97 4 ,
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr joy 4 ,
.Xr pci 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Ox 3.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Yannick Montulet Aq Mt yannick.montulet@epitech.net
and ported to
.Ox 3.1
by
.An Michael Shalayeff Aq Mt mickey@openbsd.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
ATTENTION!
.Pp
The hardware interface of this card contains registers not used
for normal operation, but potentially dangerous
and not possible to disable.
Potential damage ranges from frying the card to frying
motherboard or external equipment connected to its outputs.
.Sh BUGS
Currently this driver does not support MIDI, joystick input,
or the multi-voice capability.
.Pp
There is currently no way to control the volume of the DAC for
SoundBlaster Audigy cards.
.Pp
S-PDIF digital output does not work for
SoundBlaster Live! and
SoundBlaster Audigy cards.
