.\" Copyright (c) 2015-2017 Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 04, 2017
.Dt ENA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ena
.Nd "FreeBSD kernel driver for Elastic Network Adapter (ENA) family"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ena"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ena_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The ENA is a networking interface designed to make good use of modern CPU
features and system architectures.
.Pp
The ENA device exposes a lightweight management interface with a
minimal set of memory mapped registers and extendable command set
through an Admin Queue.
.Pp
The driver supports a range of ENA devices, is link-speed independent
(i.e., the same driver is used for 10GbE, 25GbE, 40GbE, etc.), and has
a negotiated and extendable feature set.
.Pp
Some ENA devices support SR-IOV. This driver is used for both the
SR-IOV Physical Function (PF) and Virtual Function (VF) devices.
.Pp
The ENA devices enable high speed and low overhead network traffic
processing by providing multiple Tx/Rx queue pairs (the maximum number
is advertised by the device via the Admin Queue), a dedicated MSI-X
interrupt vector per Tx/Rx queue pair, and CPU cacheline optimized
data placement.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports industry standard TCP/IP offload features such
as checksum offload and TCP transmit segmentation offload (TSO).
Receive-side scaling (RSS) is supported for multi-core scaling.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver and its corresponding devices implement health
monitoring mechanisms such as watchdog, enabling the device and driver
to recover in a manner transparent to the application, as well as
debug logs.
.Pp
Some of the ENA devices support a working mode called Low-latency
Queue (LLQ), which saves several more microseconds. This feature will
be implemented for driver in future releases.
.Sh HARDWARE
Supported PCI vendor ID/device IDs:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
1d0f:0ec2 - ENA PF
.It
1d0f:1ec2 - ENA PF with LLQ support
.It
1d0f:ec20 - ENA VF
.It
1d0f:ec21 - ENA VF with LLQ support
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Ss Device initialization phase:
.Bl -diag
.It ena%d: failed to init mmio read less
.Pp
Error occurred during initialization of the mmio register read request.
.It ena%d: Can not reset device
.Pp
Device could not be reset; device may not be responding or is already
during reset.
.It ena%d: device version is too low
.Pp
Version of the controller is too low and it is not supported by the driver.
.It ena%d: Invalid dma width value %d
.Pp
The controller is able to request dma transcation width. Device stopped
responding or it demanded invalid value.
.It ena%d: Can not initialize ena admin queue with device
.Pp
Initialization of the Admin Queue failed; device may not be responding or there
was a problem with initialization of the resources.
.It ena%d: Cannot get attribute for ena device rc: %d
.Pp
Failed to get attributes of the device from the controller.
.It ena%d: Cannot configure aenq groups rc: %d
.Pp
Errors occurred when trying to configure AENQ groups.
.El
.Ss Driver initialisation/shutdown phase:
.Bl -diag
.It ena%d: PCI resource allocation failed!
.It ena%d: allocating ena_dev failed
.It ena%d: failed to pmap registers bar
.It ena%d: Error while setting up bufring
.It ena%d: Error with initialization of IO rings
.It ena%d: can not allocate ifnet structure
.It ena%d: Error with network interface setup
.It ena%d: Failed to enable and set the admin interrupts
.It ena%d: Failed to allocate %d, vectors %d
.It ena%d: Failed to enable MSIX, vectors %d rc %d
.It ena%d: Error with MSI-X enablement
.It ena%d: could not allocate irq vector: %d
.It ena%d: Unable to allocate bus resource: registers
.Pp
Resource allocation failed when initializing the device; driver will not
be attached.
.It ena%d: ENA device init failed (err: %d)
.Pp
Device initialization failed; driver will not be attached.
.It ena%d: could not activate irq vector: %d
.Pp
Error occurred when trying to activate interrupt vectors for Admin Queue.
.It ena%d: failed to register interrupt handler for irq %ju: %d
.Pp
Error occurred when trying to register Admin Queue interrupt handler.
.It ena%d: Cannot setup mgmnt queue intr
.Pp
Error occurred during configuration of the Admin Queue interrupts.
.It ena%d: Enable MSI-X failed
.Pp
Configuration of the MSI-X for Admin Queue failed; there could be lack
of resources or interrupts could not have been configured; driver will
not be attached.
.It ena%d: VLAN is in use, detach first
.Pp
VLANs are being used when trying to detach the driver; VLANs should be detached
first and then detach routine should be called again.
.It ena%d: Unmapped RX DMA tag associations
.It ena%d: Unmapped TX DMA tag associations
.Pp
Error occurred when trying to destroy RX/TX DMA tag.
.It ena%d: Cannot init RSS
.It ena%d: Cannot fill indirect table
.It ena%d: Cannot fill indirect table
.It ena%d: Cannot fill hash function
.It ena%d: Cannot fill hash control
.It ena%d: WARNING: RSS was not properly initialized, it will affect bandwidth
.Pp
Error occurred during initialization of one of RSS resources; device is still
going to work but it will affect performance because all RX packets will be
passed to queue 0 and there will be no hash information.
.It ena%d: failed to tear down irq: %d
.It ena%d: dev has no parent while releasing res for irq: %d
Release of the interrupts failed.
.El
.Ss Additional diagnostic:
.Bl -diag
.It ena%d: Cannot get attribute for ena device
.Pp
This message appears when trying to change MTU and driver is unable to get
attributes from the device.
.It ena%d: Invalid MTU setting. new_mtu: %d
.Pp
Requested MTU value is not supported and will not be set.
.It ena%d: keep alive watchdog timeout
.Pp
Device stopped responding and will be reset.
.It ena%d: Found a Tx that wasn't completed on time, qid %d, index %d.
.Pp
Packet was pushed to the NIC but not sent within given time limit; it may
be caused by hang of the IO queue.
.It ena%d: The number of lost tx completion is aboce the threshold (%d > %d). Reset the device
.Pp
If too many Tx wasn't completed on time the device is going to be reset; it may
be caused by hanged queue or device.
.It ena%d: trigger reset is on
.Pp
Device will be reset; reset is triggered either by watchdog or if too many TX
packets were not completed on time.
.It ena%d: invalid value recvd
.Pp
Link status received from the device in the AENQ handler is invalid.
.It ena%d: Allocation for Tx Queue %u failed
.It ena%d: Allocation for Rx Queue %u failed
.It ena%d: Unable to create Rx DMA map for buffer %d
.It ena%d: Failed to create io TX queue #%d rc: %d
.It ena%d: Failed to get TX queue handlers. TX queue num %d rc: %d
.It ena%d: Failed to create io RX queue[%d] rc: %d
.It ena%d: Failed to get RX queue handlers. RX queue num %d rc: %d
.It ena%d: failed to request irq
.It ena%d: could not allocate irq vector: %d
.It ena%d: failed to register interrupt handler for irq %ju: %d
.Pp
IO resources initialization failed. Interface will not be brought up.
.It ena%d: LRO[%d] Initialization failed!
.Pp
Initialization of the LRO for the RX ring failed.
.It ena%d: failed to alloc buffer for rx queue
.It ena%d: failed to add buffer for rx queue %d
.It ena%d: refilled rx queue %d with %d pages only
.Pp
Allocation of resources used on RX path failed; if happened during
initialization of the IO queue, the interface will not be brought up.
.It ena%d: ioctl promisc/allmulti
.Pp
IOCTL request for the device to work in promiscuous/allmulti mode; see
.Xr ifconfig 8
for more details.
.It ena%d: too many fragments. Last fragment: %d!
.Pp
Packet with unsupported number of segments was queued for sending to the
device; packet will be dropped.
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
If an issue is identified with the released source code with a supported adapter
email the specific information related to the issue to
.Aq Mt mk@semihalf.com
and
.Aq Mt mw@semihalf.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Semihalf.
