.\"	$OpenBSD: ep.4,v 1.35 2013/08/14 06:32:34 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 Herb Peyerl
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Herb Peyerl
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 14 2013 $
.Dt EP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ep
.Nd 3Com EtherLink III and Fast EtherLink III 10/100 Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ep* at eisa?"
.Cd "ep* at isa?"
.Cd "ep* at pci?"
.Cd "ep* at pcmcia?"
.Cd "ep* at isapnp?"
.Cd "tqphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports the 3Com EtherLink III and Fast EtherLink III family
of Ethernet cards.
This includes, among others, the following models:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 3CXXXX -offset indent -compact
.It 3C509
EtherLink III ISA
.It 3C509B
EtherLink III ISA (Plug-and-Play)
.It 3C556
EtherLink III LAN+Modem PC Card (PCMCIA)
.It 3C562
EtherLink III LAN+33.6K Modem PC Card (PCMCIA)
.It 3C574
Fast EtherLink III 10/100 LAN PC Card (PCMCIA)
.It 3C579
EtherLink III EISA
.It 3C589
EtherLink III LAN PC Card (PCMCIA)
.It 3C590
Fast EtherLink III PCI
.It 3C592
EtherLink III EISA Bus Master
.It 3C595
Fast EtherLink III PCI 10/100
.It 3C597
Fast EtherLink III EISA 10/100
.El
.Pp
Category 3, 4 or 5 unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) cable should be used for
RJ-45 (10baseT), thick Ethernet coaxial (RG59 B/U, 50 ohm) for AUI/DIX, and
thin Ethernet coaxial (RG58 A/U or C/U, 50 ohm +/- 4) for BNC (10base2).
Some 3Com NICs also support MII connectors (switchable 10/100Mbps UTP).
.Pp
The following media types and options (as given to
.Xr ifconfig 8 )
are supported:
.Bl -tag -width xxx -offset indent
.It Cm media No autoselect
Enable autoselection of media type and options.
.It Cm media No 100baseTX Cm mediaopt No full-duplex
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation and force full-duplex mode.
.It Cm media No 100baseTX Cm mediaopt No half-duplex
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation and force half-duplex mode.
.It Cm media No 10baseT Cm mediaopt No full-duplex
Set 10baseT (UTP) operation and force full-duplex mode.
.It Cm media No 10baseT Cm mediaopt No half-duplex
Set 10baseT (UTP) operation and force half-duplex mode.
.It Cm media No 10base5
Set 10base5 (thick-net) operation (half-duplex only).
.It Cm media No 10base2
Set 10base2 (thin-net) operation (half-duplex only).
.El
.Pp
Note that the 100baseTX media type is only available if supported by the
adapter.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
To view a list of media types and options supported by your card try
.Dq ifconfig <device> media .
For example,
.Dq ifconfig ep0 media .
.Pp
If more than one of the supported cards is installed, they are probed for
in the following order:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
PCI cards based on PCI function number order.
.It
EISA cards based on EISA slot number order.
.It
ISA cards based on increasing Ethernet address order.
.It
Any ISA cards in Plug-and-Play mode, in Plug-and-Play order.
.El
.Pp
You may specify the port and IRQ numbers where the cards are expected to
be found, but it is not necessary.
The cards are intelligent enough to let us know where they live on the bus.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It ep0: reset (status: %x)
The driver has encountered a FIFO underrun or overrun.
The driver will reset the card and the packet will be lost.
This is not fatal.
.It ep0: eeprom failed to come ready
The EEPROM failed to come ready.
This probably means the card is wedged.
.It ep0: erase pencil mark, or disable PnP mode!
This means that someone has scribbled with pencil in the test area on the
card.
Erase the pencil mark and reboot.
(This is not a joke).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr eisa 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr isapnp 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr pcmcia 4 ,
.Xr tqphy 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
