.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Oleksandr Tymoshenko
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 3, 2018
.Dt "FDT_PINCTRL" 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fdt_pinctrl
.Nd FDT I/O pin multiplexing support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device fdt_pinctrl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
Pin multiplexing is a technology used to re-purpose a single
physical connection (depending on chip packaging it may be
pin, ball, or pad) by routing its signal to any one of several 
different SoC internal devices.
For example, based on the actual device design, a single SoC chip
pin might perform any of these roles: SPI clock, I2C
data, GPIO pin, or PWM signal.
Function selection is performed by the pinmux controller, a SoC
hardware block which is usually controlled by a set of registers.
Pinmux controller capabilities and register format depend
on the actual hardware implementation.
.Pp
On
.Xr fdt 4
based systems, the pinmux controller is represented by a node in
the device tree.
It may have any number of child nodes representing pin
configuration groups.
Properties of such nodes are hardware-specific and handled
by individual pinctrl drivers.
.Ss Example 1
Pinmux controller device tree node
.Bd -literal
pinctrl@7e220000 {
    compatible = "vndr,soc1715-pinctrl";
    reg = <0x7e220000 0x100>

    spi0_pins: spi0 {
        vndr,pins = <11 12>
        vndr,functions = <ALT0 ALT5>
    }

    i2c0_pins: i2c0 {
        ...
    }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Client devices are hardware devices that require certain pin
configurations to function properly.
Depending on the state the device is in (active, idle) it might
require different pin configurations.
Each configuration is described by setting the pinctrl-N
property to the list of phandles pointing to specific child
nodes of the pinmux controller node.
N is an integer value starting with 0 and incremented by 1
for every new set of pin configurations.
pinctrl-0 is a default configuration that is applied in the
.Xr fdt_pinctrl_configure_tree 9
call.
In addition to referring to pin configurations by index, they
can be referred to by name if the pinctrl-names property is set.
The value of pinctrl-names is a list of strings with names for
each pinctrl-N property.
Client devices can request specific configuration using
.Xr fdt_pinctrl_configure 9
and
.Xr fdt_pinctrl_configure_by_name 9 .
.Ss Example 2
.Bd -literal
backlight@7f000000 {
    compatible = "vndr,vndr-bl"
    reg = <0x7f000000 0x20>
    ...
    pinctrl-name = "active", "idle"
    pinctrl-0 = <&backlight_active_pins>
    pinctrl-1 = <&backlight_idle_pins>
}
.Ed
.Pp
The pinctrl driver should implement the FDT_PINCTRL_CONFIGURE
method, register itself as a pin configuration handler by
calling fdt_pinctrl_register function, and call
.Xr fdt_pinctrl_configure_tree 9
to configure pins for all enabled devices (devices where
the "status" property is not set to "disabled").
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fdt_pinctrl 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was developed by
.An \&Ian Lepore Aq Mt ian@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Oleksandr Tymoshenko Aq Mt gonzo@FreeBSD.org .
