.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2002 Katsushi Kobayashi and Hidetoshi Shimokawa
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the acknowledgement as bellow:
.\"
.\"    This product includes software developed by K. Kobayashi and H. Shimokawa
.\"
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 11, 2012
.Dt FIREWIRE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm firewire
.Nd IEEE1394 High-performance Serial Bus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device firewire"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
firewire_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fx
provides machine-independent bus support and raw drivers for
.Nm
interfaces.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver consists of two layers: the controller and the
bus layer.
The controller attaches to a physical bus
(like
.Xr pci 4 ) .
The
.Nm
bus attaches to the controller.
Additional drivers can be attached to the bus.
.Pp
Up to 63 devices, including the host itself, can be attached to
a
.Nm
bus.
The root node is dynamically assigned with a PHY device function.
Also, the other
.Nm
bus specific parameters,
e.g., node ID, cycle master, isochronous resource manager and bus
manager, are dynamically assigned, after bus reset is initiated.
On the
.Nm
bus, every device is identified by an EUI 64 address.
.Pp
Debugging over the firewire interace is possible with the
.Xr dcons 4
driver.
Please see
.Pa https://wiki.freebsd.org/DebugWithDcons
for details on how to setup debugging with firewire.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "Pa /dev/fwmem0.0" -compact
.It Pa /dev/fw0.0
.It Pa /dev/fwmem0.0
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dcons 4 ,
.Xr fwe 4 ,
.Xr fwip 4 ,
.Xr fwohci 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sbp 4 ,
.Xr eui64 5 ,
.Xr fwcontrol 8 ,
.Xr kldload 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Katsushi Kobayashi
and
.An Hidetoshi Shimokawa
for the
.Fx
project.
.Sh BUGS
See
.Xr fwohci 4
for security notes.
