.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Hidetoshi Shimokawa
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\"
.Dd July 16, 2005
.Dt FWE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fwe
.Nd "Ethernet emulation driver for FireWire"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device firewire"
.Cd "device fwe"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_fwe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides non-standard Ethernet emulation over FireWire (IEEE 1394).
.Pp
.Xr firewire 4
and
.Xr fwohci 4
must be configured in the kernel as well.
.Pp
This driver exploits asynchronous stream over IEEE 1394 to carry Ethernet
frames.
The stream channel can be specified by
the
.Va hw.firewire.fwe.stream_ch
.Xr sysctl 8 .
.Pp
This driver supports
.Xr polling 4
as well if it is compiled with the
.Dv DEVICE_POLLING
option.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr firewire 4 ,
.Xr fwip 4 ,
.Xr fwohci 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr kldload 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Hidetoshi Shimokawa .
.Sh BUGS
This driver emulates Ethernet in a very adhoc way and it does not reserve a
stream channel using an isochronous manager.
Note that this driver uses a protocol which is very different from RFC 2734
(IPv4 over IEEE 1394).
