.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 David E. O'Brien
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 26, 2010
.Dt FXP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fxp
.Nd "Intel EtherExpress PRO/100 Ethernet device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device fxp"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_fxp_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
i82557, i82558, i82559, i82550, and i82562 chips.
The driver supports TCP/UDP/IP checksum offload for both transmit
and receive on i82550 and i82551.
On i82559 only TCP/UDP checksum offload for receive is supported.
TCP segmentation offload (TSO) for IPv4 as well as VLAN hardware
tag insertion/stripping is supported on i82550 and i82551.
Wake On Lan (WOL) support is provided on all controllers
except i82557, i82259ER and early i82558 revisions.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width "10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The autoselected mode can be overridden by adding the media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width "full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
Note that 100baseTX media type is not available on the Pro/10.
For further information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports reception and transmission of extended frames
for
.Xr vlan 4 .
This capability of
.Nm
can be controlled by means of the
.Cm vlanmtu
parameter
to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver also supports a special link option:
.Bl -tag -width link0
.It Cm link0
Some chip revisions have loadable microcode which can be used to reduce the
interrupt load on the host cpu.
Not all boards have microcode support.
Setting the
.Cm link0
flag with
.Xr ifconfig 8
will download the microcode to the chip if it is available.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
Adapters supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Intel EtherExpress PRO/10
.It
Intel InBusiness 10/100
.It
Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter
.It
Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter
.It
Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter
.It
Intel PRO/100 VM Network Connection
.It
Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter
.It
Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters
.It
Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
The following variables are available as both
.Xr loader 8
tunables and
.Xr sysctl 8
variables:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va dev.fxp.%d.int_delay
Maximum amount of time, in microseconds, that an interrupt may
be delayed in an attempt to coalesce interrupts.
This is only effective if the Intel microcode is loaded.
The accepted range is 300 to 3000, the default is 1000.
.It Va dev.fxp.%d.bundle_max
Number of packets that will be bundled, before an interrupt is
generated.
This is only effective if the Intel microcode is loaded.
The accepted range is 1 to 65535, the default is 6.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as
.Xr sysctl 8
variables.
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va dev.fxp.%d.rnr
This is a read-only variable and shows the number of events of
RNR (resource not ready).
.It Va dev.fxp.%d.stats
This is a read-only variable and displays useful MAC counters
maintained in the driver.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "fxp%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "fxp%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "fxp%d: Failed to malloc memory"
There are not enough mbuf's available for allocation.
.It "fxp%d: device timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.It "fxp%d: Microcode loaded, int_delay: %d usec  bundle_max: %d"
The chip has successfully downloaded the microcode, and changed the
parameterized values to the given settings.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An David Greenman .
It has then been updated to use the busdma API and made endian-clean by
.An Maxime Henrion .
This manual page was written by
.An David E. O'Brien .
