.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Andrew Thompson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 1, 2013
.Dt GEOM_LINUX_LVM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm geom_linux_lvm
.Nd "GEOM based Linux LVM logical volume mapping"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options GEOM_LINUX_LVM"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
geom_linux_lvm_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
framework provides support for mapping Linux LVM volumes to GEOM providers.
.Nm
currently supports linear stripes with segments on one or more physical disks.
The parser is able to read LVM2 Text Format metadata, the logical volumes will
be assembled and made available under
.Pa /dev/linux_lvm/ .
The metadata is read-only, logical volumes cannot be allocated or resized.
.Sh EXAMPLES
To view which
.Nm
devices are available:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# geom linux_lvm list
Geom name: vg1
Providers:
1. Name: linux_lvm/vg1-home
   Mediasize: 4294967296 (4.0G)
   Sectorsize: 512
   Mode: r0w0e0
2. Name: linux_lvm/vg1-logs
   Mediasize: 4294967296 (4.0G)
   Sectorsize: 512
   Mode: r0w0e0
Consumers:
1. Name: ada0s1
   Mediasize: 80023716864 (75G)
   Sectorsize: 512
   Mode: r0w0e0
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr GEOM 4 ,
.Xr geom 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Andrew Thompson Aq Mt thompsa@FreeBSD.org .
