.\"	$OpenBSD: hil.4,v 1.11 2014/03/18 22:36:31 miod Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Miodrag Vallat.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistribution of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 18 2014 $
.Dt HIL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hil
.Nd introduction to HP-HIL support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "hil* at gsc? irq 1              " Pq hppa
.Pp
.Cd "hilkbd* at hil?"
.Cd "hilms* at hil?"
.Cd "hilid* at hil?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface provides access to the
.Dq Human Interface Loop
controller found on many
.Tn HP
workstations.
.Pp
It provides generic HIL management and interfaces for child devices,
such as keyboards, button boxes, mice, graphics tablet, and ID modules.
.\".Pp
.\"hil devices:
.\"HP 45911A HP-HIL Graphics Tablet
.\"HP 46020A HP-HIL Keyboard
.\"HP 46021A HP-HIL Keyboard
.\"HP 46060A HP-HIL Mouse
.\"HP 46060B HP-HIL 3-Button Mouse
.\"HP 46083A HP-HIL Knob
.\"HP 46085A HP-HIL Control Dial Module
.\"HP 46086A HP-HIL 32-Button Box
.\"HP 46087A HP-HIL A-Size Digitizer
.\"HP 46088A HP-HIL B-Size Digitizer
.\"HP 46089A HP-HIL 4-Button Cursor for the HP 46087/88A Tablets
.\"HP 46094A HP-HIL Quadrature Box
.\"HP 46095A HP-HIL Quadrature 3-Button Mouse
.\"HP 80409A HP-HIL 3-Button Track Ball
.Pp
.Ox
provides support for the following devices:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "hilkbd(4)XX" -offset 3n -compact
.It Xr hilid 4
HIL ID module device
.It Xr hilkbd 4
HIL keyboard device
.It Xr hilms 4
HIL mouse and graphics tablet device
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gsc 4 ,
.Xr intro 4
