.\"	$OpenBSD: hilkbd.4,v 1.13 2011/01/30 07:53:57 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Miodrag Vallat.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistribution of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 30 2011 $
.Dt HILKBD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hilkbd
.Nd HIL keyboard device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "hilkbd* at hil?"
.Cd "wskbd* at hilkbd?"
.Cd "option HILKBD_LAYOUT=XXX"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver supports HIL keyboards within the
.Xr wscons 4
framework.
It doesn't provide direct device driver entry points, but makes its
functions available through the internal
.Xr wskbd 4
interface.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports a number of different key mappings.
By default, the layout corresponding to the keyboard model as probed
by the
.Nm
driver will be used.
A different layout can be chosen either with the kernel option
.Dq HILKBD_LAYOUT
at compile time, or with the
.Xr wsconsctl 8
utility (variable:
.Dq keyboard.encoding )
at runtime.
.Pp
The supported key mappings are at this time:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It KB_DE
.Pq de
German with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_FR
.Pq fr
French with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_SV
.Pq sv
Swedish.
.It KB_UK
.Pq uk
British.
.It KB_US
.Pq us
English/US keyboard mapping.
.El
.Pp
The KB_DE mapping can be used in the KB_NODEAD
.Pq .nodead
variant.
This switches off the
.Dq dead accents .
.Sh EXAMPLES
To set a Swedish keyboard mapping, use
.Ic wsconsctl keyboard.encoding=sv .
To set it at kernel build time, regardless of what keyboard is plugged, add
the following to the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
option HILKBD_LAYOUT="KB_SV"
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hil 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr wskbd 4 ,
.Xr wsconsctl 8
.Sh BUGS
The list of built-in mappings is incomplete and has grown as people submitted
information about their particular layout.
.Pp
The Swedish and British layout have been reconstructed from tables in the old
HIL code present in the hp300 port, and have not been tested.
