.\"	$NetBSD: hme.4,v 1.4 2003/02/14 15:20:18 grant Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Klaus Klein.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 14, 2009
.Dt HME 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hme
.Nd "Sun Microelectronics STP2002-STQ Ethernet interfaces device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device hme"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_hme_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports Sun Microelectronics STP2002-STQ
.Dq Happy Meal Ethernet
Fast Ethernet interfaces.
.Pp
All controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver have TCP checksum offload capability for both receive and transmit,
support for the reception and transmission of extended frames for
.Xr vlan 4
and a 128-bit multicast hash filter.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the on-board Ethernet interfaces of many
Sun
.Tn UltraSPARC
workstation and server models.
.Pp
Cards supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter
.Pq Dq SUNW,hme
.It
Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter
.Dq ( hme
and
.Dq SUNW,hme )
.It
Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0
.Pq Dq SUNW,hme
.It
Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0
.Pq Dq SUNW,hme
.It
Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller
.Pq Dq SUNW,qfe
.It
Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller
.Pq Dq SUNW,qfe
.El
.Sh NOTES
On sparc64 the
.Nm
driver respects the
.Va local-mac-address?
system configuration variable which can be set in the Open Firmware boot
monitor using the
.Ic setenv
command or by
.Xr eeprom 8 .
If set to
.Dq Li false
(the default), the
.Nm
driver will use the system's default MAC address for all of its devices.
If set to
.Dq Li true ,
the unique MAC address of each interface is used if present rather than
the system's default MAC address.
.Pp
Supported interfaces having their own MAC address include on-board versions
on boards equipped with more than one Ethernet interface and all add-on cards
except the single-port SBus versions.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr eeprom 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T "STP2002QFP Fast Ethernet, Parallel Port, SCSI (FEPS) User's Guide"
.%D April 1996
.%A Sun Microelectronics
.%U http://mediacast.sun.com/users/Barton808/media/STP2002QFP-FEPs_UG.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
The first
.Fx
version to include it was
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Paul Kranenburg Aq Mt pk@NetBSD.org .
