.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 14, 2010
.Dt HPET 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hpet
.Nd High Precision Event Timer driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi"
.Ed
.Pp
The following tunables are settable from the
.Xr loader 8 :
.Bl -ohang
.It Va hint.hpet. Ns Ar X Ns Va .allowed_irqs
is a 32bit mask.
Each set bit allows driver to use respective IRQ,
if BIOS also set respective capability bit in comparator's configuration
register.
Default value is 0xffff0000, except some known broken hardware.
.It Va hint.hpet. Ns Ar X Ns Va .clock
controls event timers functionality support.
Setting to 0, disables it.
Default value is 1.
.It Va hint.hpet. Ns Ar X Ns Va .legacy_route
controls "LegacyReplacement Route" mode.
If enabled, HPET will steal IRQ0 of i8254 timer and IRQ8 of RTC.
Before using it, make sure that respective
drivers are not using interrupts, by setting also:
.Bd -literal
hint.attimer.0.clock=0
hint.atrtc.0.clock=0
.Ed
Default value is 0.
.It Va hint.hpet. Ns Ar X Ns Va .per_cpu
controls how much per-CPU event timers should driver attempt to register.
This functionality requires every comparator in a group to have own unshared
IRQ, so it depends on hardware capabilities and interrupts configuration.
Default value is 1.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver uses High Precision Event Timer hardware (part of the chipset,
usually enumerated via ACPI) to supply kernel with one time counter and
several (usually from 3 to 8) event timers.
This hardware includes single main counter with known increment frequency
(10MHz or more), and several programmable comparators (optionally with
automatic reload feature).
When value of the main counter matches current value of any comparator,
interrupt can be generated.
Depending on hardware capabilities and configuration, interrupt can be
delivered as regular I/O APIC interrupt (ISA or PCI) in range from 0 to 31,
or as Front Side Bus interrupt, alike to PCI MSI interrupts, or in so called
"LegacyReplacement Route" HPET can steal IRQ0 of i8254 and IRQ8 of the RTC.
Interrupt can be either edge- or level-triggered.
In last case they could be safely shared with PCI IRQs.
Driver prefers to use FSB interrupts, if supported, to avoid sharing.
If it is not possible, it uses single sharable IRQ from PCI range.
Other modes (LegacyReplacement and ISA IRQs) require special care to setup,
but could be configured manually via device hints.
.Pp
Event timers provided by the driver support both one-shot an periodic modes
and irrelevant to CPU power states.
.Pp
Depending on hardware capabilities and configuration, driver can expose each
comparator as separate event timer or group them into one or several per-CPU
event timers.
In last case interrupt of every of those comparators within
group is bound to specific CPU core.
This is possible only when each of these comparators has own unsharable IRQ.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr apic 4 ,
.Xr atrtc 4 ,
.Xr attimer 4 ,
.Xr eventtimers 4 ,
.Xr timecounters 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.3 .
Support for event timers was added in
.Fx 9.0 .
