.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Me
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 6, 2012
.Dt HPTRR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hptrr
.Nd "HighPoint RocketRAID device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device hptrr"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device da"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hptrr_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
The following tunables are settable from the loader:
.Bl -ohang
.It Va hw.hptrr.attach_generic
set to 1 to permit driver attach to chips with generic Marvell (non-HighPoint)
PCI identification.
These chips are also supported by
.Xr ata 4
and
.Xr mvs 4 .
Some vendors are using same chips, but without providing RAID BIOS.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for HighPoint's RocketRAID based RAID controllers.
.Pp
These devices support SATA/ATA disk drives
and provide RAID0 (striping), RAID1 (mirroring), and RAID5 functionality.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following RAID
controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
RocketRAID 172x series
.It
RocketRAID 174x series
.It
RocketRAID 2210
.It
RocketRAID 222x series
.It
RocketRAID 2240
.It
RocketRAID 230x series
.It
RocketRAID 231x series
.It
RocketRAID 232x series
.It
RocketRAID 2340
.It
RocketRAID 2522
.El
.Sh NOTES
The
.Nm
driver only works on the i386 and amd64 platforms as it requires a binary
blob object from the manufacturer which they only supply for these platforms.
The
.Nm
driver does
.Em not
work on i386 with
.Xr pae 4
enabled.
.Pp
This driver does not support the RR182x series controller.
See the
.Xr hptmv 4
manual page for details on support.
.Pp
This driver supersedes the older rr232x driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ata 4 ,
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr hptmv 4 ,
.Xr mvs 4 ,
.Xr loader 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An HighPoint Technologies, Inc. ,
and ported to
.Fx
by
.An Scott Long .
This manual page was written by
.An David E. O'Brien .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver does not support manipulating the RAID from the OS, RAIDs need
to be set up from the on-board BIOS.
