.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Microsoft Corp.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd September 10, 2013
.Dt HYPER-V 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hv_utils
.Nd Hyper-V Utilities Driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in
the system kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device hyperv"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides time keeping, shutdown and heartbeat
functionality for
.Fx
guest partitions running on Hyper-V.
Hyper-V is a hypervisor-based virtualization technology from Microsoft.
The
.Nm
driver is one of the core drivers required to be present in guest
partitions running on Hyper-V.
This driver provides the following
functionalities to guest partitions:
.Pp
(a) Time Keeping: The clock inside the guest partition will remain accurate by
synchronizing to the clock on the virtualization server via Timesync service,
and with the help of the pluggable time source device.
.Pp
(b) Integrated shutdown: Guest partitions running
.Fx
can be shut down from
Hyper-V Manager console by using the
.Qq Shut down
command.
.Pp
(c) Heartbeat: This feature allows the virtualization server to detect whether
the guest partition is running and responsive.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hv_ata_pci_disengage 4 ,
.Xr hv_netvsc 4 ,
.Xr hv_storvsc 4 ,
.Xr hv_vmbus 4
.Sh HISTORY
Support for
.Nm
first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
The driver was developed through a joint effort between Citrix Incorporated,
Microsoft Corporation, and Network Appliance Incorporated.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.Fx
support for
.Nm
was first added by
.An Microsoft BSD Integration Services Team Aq Mt bsdic@microsoft.com .
