.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Microsoft Corp.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd October 12, 2016
.Dt HV_VSS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hv_vss
.Nd Hyper-V Volume Shadow Copy Service API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In dev/hyperv/hv_snapshot.h
.Bd -literal
#define VSS_SUCCESS		0x00000000
#define VSS_FAIL		0x00000001

enum hv_vss_op_t {
	HV_VSS_NONE = 0,
	HV_VSS_CHECK,
	HV_VSS_FREEZE,
	HV_VSS_THAW,
	HV_VSS_COUNT
};

struct hv_vss_opt_msg {
	uint32_t	opt;		/* operation */
	uint32_t	status;		/* 0 for success, 1 for error */
	uint64_t	msgid;		/* an ID used to identify the transaction */
	uint8_t		reserved[48];	/* reserved values are all zeroes */
};
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The freeze or thaw functionality of application is important to guarantee
the application consistent backup. On windows platform, VSS is defined to do
live backup. But for VM guest running on Hyper-V, the corresponding VSS is
not defined yet. For example, a running database server instance, it knows when the
applications' freeze/thaw should start or finish. But it is not aware of
the freeze/thaw notification from Hyper-V host. The
.Nm
is designed to notify application freeze/thaw request.
Thus, it plays a role of broker to forward the freeze/thaw command from Hyper-V host
to userland application if it registered VSS service on
.Fx
VM, and sends the result back to Hyper-V host.
.Pp
Generally,
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8
takes the responsibility to freeze/thaw UFS file system,
and it is automatically launched after system boots. When Hyper-V host wants to
take a snapshot of the
.Fx
VM, it will first send VSS capability check to
.Fx
VM. The
.Nm
received the request and forward the request to userland application if it is
registered. Only after
.Nm
received the VSS_SUCCESS response from application, the
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8
will be informed to check whether file system freeze/thaw is supported. Any error
occurs during this period,
.Nm
will inform Hyper-V host that VSS is not supported. In addition, there is a default
timeout limit before sending response to Hyper-V host.
If the total response time from application and
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8
exceeds this value, timeout
will occurs and VSS unsupported is responsed to Hyper-V host.
.Pp
After Hyper-V host confirmed the
.Fx
VM supports VSS, it will send freeze request to VM, and
.Nm
will first forward it to application. After application finished freezing, it should
inform
.Nm
and file system level freezing will be triggered by
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8 . After all freezing
on both application and
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8
were finished, the
.Nm
will inform Hyper-V host that freezing is done. Of course, there is a timeout limit as
same as VSS capability is set to make sure freezing on
.Fx
VM is not hang. If there is any error occurs or timeout happened, the freezing is failed
on Hyper-V side.
.Pp
Hyper-V host will send thaw request after taking the snapshot, typically, this period is
very short in order not to block the running application.
.Nm
firstly thaw the file system by notifying
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8 ,
then notifies user registered
application. There is also a timeout check before sending response to Hyper-V host.
.Pp
All the default timeout limit used in VSS capability check, freeze or thaw is the same.
It is 15 seconds currently.
.Sh NOTES
.Nm
only support UFS currently. If any of file system partition is non UFS, the VSS capability
check will fail. If application does not register VSS,
.Nm
only support backup for file system level consistent. The device should be closed before it
was opened again. If you want to simultaneously open "/dev/hv_appvss_dev" two or more times,
an error (-1) will be returned, and errno was set.
.Pp
If
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8
was killed after system boots, the VSS functionality will not work.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following is a complete example which does nothing except for waiting 2 seconds when
receiving those notifications from
.Nm
.Bd -literal
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/ioctl.h>
#include <sys/param.h>
#include <sys/ucred.h>
#include <sys/mount.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <poll.h>
#include <stdint.h>
#include <syslog.h>
#include <errno.h>
#include <err.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <ufs/ffs/fs.h>
#include <paths.h>
#include <sys/ioccom.h>
#include <dev/hyperv/hv_snapshot.h>

#define UNDEF_FREEZE_THAW	(0)
#define FREEZE			(1)
#define THAW			(2)
#define CHECK			(3)

#define	VSS_LOG(priority, format, args...) do	{				\\
		if (is_debugging == 1) {					\\
			if (is_daemon == 1)					\\
				syslog(priority, format, ## args);		\\
			else							\\
				printf(format, ## args);			\\
		} else {							\\
			if (priority < LOG_DEBUG) {				\\
				if (is_daemon == 1)				\\
					syslog(priority, format, ## args);	\\
				else						\\
					printf(format, ## args);		\\
			}							\\
		}								\\
	} while(0)

#define CHECK_TIMEOUT		1
#define CHECK_FAIL		2
#define FREEZE_TIMEOUT		1
#define FREEZE_FAIL		2
#define THAW_TIMEOUT		1
#define THAW_FAIL		2

static int is_daemon        = 1;
static int is_debugging     = 0;
static int simu_opt_waiting = 2; // seconds

#define GENERIC_OPT(TIMEOUT, FAIL)						\\
	do {									\\
		sleep(simu_opt_waiting);					\\
		if (opt == CHECK_TIMEOUT) {					\\
			sleep(simu_opt_waiting * 10);				\\
			VSS_LOG(LOG_INFO, "%s timeout simulation\\n",		\\
			    __func__);						\\
			return (0);						\\
		} else if (opt == CHECK_FAIL) {					\\
			VSS_LOG(LOG_INFO, "%s failure simulation\\n",		\\
			    __func__);						\\
			return (CHECK_FAIL);					\\
		} else {							\\
			VSS_LOG(LOG_INFO, "%s success simulation\\n",		\\
			    __func__);						\\
			return (0);						\\
		}								\\
	} while (0)

static int
check(int opt)
{
	GENERIC_OPT(CHECK_TIMEOUT, CHECK_FAIL);
}

static int
freeze(int opt)
{
	GENERIC_OPT(FREEZE_TIMEOUT, FREEZE_FAIL);
}

static int
thaw(int opt)
{
	GENERIC_OPT(THAW_TIMEOUT, THAW_FAIL);
}

static void usage(const char* cmd) {
	fprintf(stderr,
	    "%s -f <0|1|2>: simulate app freeze."
	    " 0: successful, 1: freeze timeout, 2: freeze failed\\n"
	    " -c <0|1|2>: simulate vss feature check"
	    " -t <0|1|2>: simulate app thaw."
	    " 0: successful, 1: freeze timeout, 2: freeze failed\\n"
	    " -d : enable debug mode\\n"
	    " -n : run this tool under non-daemon mode\\n", cmd);
}

int
main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
	int ch, freezesimuop = 0, thawsimuop = 0, checksimuop = 0, fd, r, error;
	uint32_t op;
	struct pollfd app_vss_fd[1];
	struct hv_vss_opt_msg  userdata;

	while ((ch = getopt(argc, argv, "f:c:t:dnh")) != -1) {
		switch (ch) {
		case 'f':
			/* Run as regular process for debugging purpose. */
			freezesimuop = (int)strtol(optarg, NULL, 10);
			break;
		case 't':
			thawsimuop = (int)strtol(optarg, NULL, 10);
			break;
		case 'c':
			checksimuop = (int)strtol(optarg, NULL, 10);
			break;
		case 'd':
			is_debugging = 1;
			break;
		case 'n':
			is_daemon = 0;
			break;
		case 'h':
		default:
			usage(argv[0]);
			exit(0);
		}
	}

	openlog("APPVSS", 0, LOG_USER);
	/* Become daemon first. */
	if (is_daemon == 1)
		daemon(1, 0);
	else
		VSS_LOG(LOG_DEBUG, "Run as regular process.\\n");

	VSS_LOG(LOG_INFO, "HV_VSS starting; pid is: %d\\n", getpid());

	fd = open(VSS_DEV(APP_VSS_DEV_NAME), O_RDWR);
	if (fd < 0) {
		VSS_LOG(LOG_ERR, "Fail to open %s, error: %d %s\\n",
		    VSS_DEV(APP_VSS_DEV_NAME), errno, strerror(errno));
		exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
	}
	app_vss_fd[0].fd     = fd;
	app_vss_fd[0].events = POLLIN | POLLRDNORM;

	while (1) {
		r = poll(app_vss_fd, 1, INFTIM);

		VSS_LOG(LOG_DEBUG, "poll returned r = %d, revent = 0x%x\\n",
		    r, app_vss_fd[0].revents);

		if (r == 0 || (r < 0 && errno == EAGAIN) ||
		    (r < 0 && errno == EINTR)) {
			/* Nothing to read */
			continue;
		}

		if (r < 0) {
			/*
			 * For poll return failure other than EAGAIN,
			 * we want to exit.
			 */
			VSS_LOG(LOG_ERR, "Poll failed.\\n");
			perror("poll");
			exit(EIO);
		}

		/* Read from character device */
		error = ioctl(fd, IOCHVVSSREAD, &userdata);
		if (error < 0) {
			VSS_LOG(LOG_ERR, "Read failed.\\n");
			perror("pread");
			exit(EIO);
		}

		if (userdata.status != 0) {
			VSS_LOG(LOG_ERR, "data read error\\n");
			continue;
		}

		op = userdata.opt;

		switch (op) {
		case HV_VSS_CHECK:
			error = check(checksimuop);
			break;
		case HV_VSS_FREEZE:
			error = freeze(freezesimuop);
			break;
		case HV_VSS_THAW:
			error = thaw(thawsimuop);
			break;
		default:
			VSS_LOG(LOG_ERR, "Illegal operation: %d\\n", op);
			error = VSS_FAIL;
		}
		if (error)
			userdata.status = VSS_FAIL;
		else
			userdata.status = VSS_SUCCESS;
		error = ioctl(fd, IOCHVVSSWRITE, &userdata);
		if (error != 0) {
			VSS_LOG(LOG_ERR, "Fail to write to device\\n");
			exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
		} else {
			VSS_LOG(LOG_INFO, "Send response %d for %s to kernel\\n",
			    userdata.status, op == HV_VSS_FREEZE ? "Freeze" :
			    (op == HV_VSS_THAW ? "Thaw" : "Check"));
		}
	}
	return 0;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hv_utils 4 ,
.Xr hv_vss_daemon 8
.Sh HISTORY
The daemon was introduced in October 2016 and developed by Microsoft Corp.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.Fx
support for
.Nm
was first added by
.An Microsoft BSD Integration Services Team Aq Mt bsdic@microsoft.com .
