.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Dag-Erling Coïdan Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 20, 2008
.Dt ICHWD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ichwd
.Nd device driver for the Intel ICH watchdog interrupt timer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ichwd"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ichwd_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Xr watchdog 4
support for the watchdog interrupt timer present on
all Intel ICH motherboard chipsets.
.Pp
The ICH WDT counts down in ticks of approximately 0.6 seconds; the
exact value depends on hardware quality and environmental factors.
Supported watchdog intervals range from 2 to 63 ticks.
.Pp
Note that on some ICH-based systems, the WDT may be present but
disabled, either in hardware or by the BIOS.
The
.Nm
driver attempts to detect this condition and will refuse to attach if
it believes the WDT is disabled.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 8 ,
.Xr watchdogd 8 ,
.Xr watchdog 9
.Rs
.%T Using the Intel ICH Family Watchdog Timer (WDT)
.%R Intel Application Note AP-725
.%O Document Number 292273-001
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Wm. Daryl Hawkins Aq Mt dhawkins@tamu.edu
of Texas A&M University and
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq Mt des@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq Mt des@FreeBSD.org .
