.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Andrey V. Elsukov <ae@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 6, 2017
.Dt if_ipsec 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm if_ipsec
.Nd IPsec virtual tunneling interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
The
.Cm if_ipsec
network interface is a part of the
.Fx
IPsec implementation.
To compile it into the kernel, place this line in the kernel
configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options IPSEC"
.Ed
.Pp
It can also be loaded as part of the
.Cm ipsec
kernel module if the kernel was compiled with
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options IPSEC_SUPPORT"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
network interface is targeted for creating route-based VPNs.
It can tunnel IPv4 and IPv6 traffic over either IPv4 or IPv6 and secure
it with ESP.
.Pp
.Nm
interfaces are dynamically created and destroyed with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm create
and
.Cm destroy
subcommands.
The administrator must configure IPsec
.Cm tunnel
endpoint addresses.
These addresses will be used for the outer IP header of ESP packets.
The administrator can also configure the protocol and addresses for the inner
IP header with
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
and modify the routing table to route the packets through the
.Nm
interface.
.Pp
When the
.Nm
interface is configured, it automatically creates special security policies.
These policies can be used to acquire security associations from the IKE daemon,
which are needed for establishing an IPsec tunnel.
It is also possible to create needed security associations manually with the
.Xr setkey 8
utility.
.Pp
Each
.Nm
interface has an additional numeric configuration option
.Cm reqid Ar id .
This
.Ar id
is used to distinguish traffic and security policies between several
.Nm
interfaces.
The
.Cm reqid
can be specified on interface creation and changed later.
If not specified, it is automatically assigned.
Note that changing
.Cm reqid
will lead to generation of new security policies, and this
may require creating new security associations.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The example below shows manual configuration of an IPsec tunnel
between two FreeBSD hosts.
Host A has the IP address 192.168.0.3, and host B has the IP address
192.168.0.5.
.Pp
On host A:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig ipsec0 create reqid 100
ifconfig ipsec0 inet tunnel 192.168.0.3 192.168.0.5
ifconfig ipsec0 inet 172.16.0.3/16 172.16.0.5
setkey -c
add 192.168.0.3 192.168.0.5 esp 10000 -m tunnel -u 100 -E rijndael-cbc "VerySecureKey!!1";
add 192.168.0.5 192.168.0.3 esp 10001 -m tunnel -u 100 -E rijndael-cbc "VerySecureKey!!2";
^D
.Ed
.Pp
On host B:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig ipsec0 create reqid 200
ifconfig ipsec0 inet tunnel 192.168.0.5 192.168.0.3
ifconfig ipsec0 inet 172.16.0.5/16 172.16.0.3
setkey -c
add 192.168.0.3 192.168.0.5 esp 10000 -m tunnel -u 200 -E rijndael-cbc "VerySecureKey!!1";
add 192.168.0.5 192.168.0.3 esp 10001 -m tunnel -u 200 -E rijndael-cbc "VerySecureKey!!2";
^D
.Ed
.Pp
Note the value 100 on host A and value 200 on host B are used as reqid.
The same value must be used as identifier of the policy entry in the
.Xr setkey 8
command.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gif 4 ,
.Xr gre 4 ,
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr setkey 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Andrey V. Elsukov Aq Mt ae@FreeBSD.org
