.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd September 27, 2018
.Dt IFLIB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iflib
.Nd Network Interface Driver Framework
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device iflib"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a framework for network interface drivers for
.Fx .
It is designed to remove a large amount of the boilerplate that is often
needed for modern network interface devices, allowing driver authors to
focus on the specific code needed for their hardware.
This allows for a shared set of
.Xr sysctl 8
names, rather than each driver naming them individually.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
These variables must be set before loading the driver, either via
.Xr loader.conf 5
or through the use of
.Xr kenv 1 .
They are all prefixed by
.Va dev.X.Y.iflib\&.
where X is the driver name, and Y is the instance number.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va override_nrxds
Override the number of RX descriptors for each queue.
The value is a comma separated list of positive integers.
Some drivers only use a single value, but others may use more.
These numbers must be powers of two, and zero means to use the default.
Individual drivers may have additional restrictions on allowable values.
Defaults to all zeros.
.It Va override_ntxds
Override the number of TX descriptors for each queue.
The value is a comma separated list of positive integers.
Some drivers only use a single value, but others may use more.
These numbers must be powers of two, and zero means to use the default.
Individual drivers may have additional restrictions on allowable values.
Defaults to all zeros.
.It Va override_qs_enable
When set, allows the number of transmit and receive queues to be different.
If not set, the lower of the number of TX or RX queues will be used for both.
.It Va override_nrxqs
Set the number of RX queues.
If zero, the number of RX queues is derived from the number of cores on the
socket connected to the controller.
Defaults to 0.
.It Va override_ntxqs
Set the number of TX queues.
If zero, the number of TX queues is derived from the number of cores on the
socket connected to the controller.
.It Va disable_msix
Disables MSI-X interrupts for the device.
.El
.Pp
These
.Xr sysctl 8
variables can be changed at any time:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va tx_abdicate
Controls how the transmit ring is serviced.
If set to zero, when a frame is submitted to the transmission ring, the same
task that is submitting it will service the ring unless there's already a
task servicing the TX ring.
This ensures that whenever there is a pending transmission,
the transmit ring is being serviced.
This results in higher transmit throughput.
If set to a non-zero value, task returns immediately and the transmit
ring is serviced by a different task.
This returns control to the caller faster and under high receive load,
may result in fewer dropped RX frames.
.It Va rx_budget
Sets the maximum number of frames to be received at a time.
Zero (the default) indicates the default (currently 16) should be used.
.El
.Pp
There are also some global sysctls which can change behaviour for all drivers,
and may be changed at any time.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va net.iflib.min_tx_latency
If this is set to a non-zero value, iflib will avoid any attempt to combine
multiple transmits, and notify the hardware as quickly as possible of
new descriptors.
This will lower the maximum throughput, but will also lower transmit latency.
.It Va net.iflib.no_tx_batch
Some NICs allow processing completed transmit descriptors in batches.
Doing so usually increases the transmit throughput by reducing the number of
transmit interrupts.
Setting this to a non-zero value will disable the use of this feature.
.El
.Pp
These
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are read-only:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va driver_version
A string indicating the internal version of the driver.
.El
.Pp
There are a number of queue state
.Xr sysctl 8
variables as well:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va txqZ
The following are repeated for each transmit queue, where Z is the transmit
queue instance number:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va r_abdications
Number of consumer abdications in the MP ring for this queue.
An abdication occurs on every ring submission when tx_abdicate is true.
.It Va r_restarts
Number of consumer restarts in the MP ring for this queue.
A restart occurs when an attempt to drain a non-empty ring fails,
and the ring is already in the STALLED state.
.It Va r_stalls
Number of consumer stalls in the MP ring for this queue.
A stall occurs when an attempt to drain a non-empty ring fails.
.It Va r_starts
Number of normal consumer starts in the MP ring for this queue.
A start occurs when the MP ring transitions from IDLE to BUSY.
.It Va r_drops
Number of drops in the MP ring for this queue.
A drop occurs when there is an attempt to add an entry to an MP ring with
no available space.
.It Va r_enqueues
Number of entries which have been enqueued to the MP ring for this queue.
.It Va ring_state
MP (soft) ring state.
This privides a snapshot of the current MP ring state, including the producer
head and tail indexes, the consumer index, and the state.
The state is one of "IDLE", "BUSY",
"STALLED", or "ABDICATED".
.It Va txq_cleaned
The number of transmit descriptors which have been reclaimed.
Total cleaned.
.It Va txq_processed
The number of transmit descriptors which have been processed, but may not yet
have been reclaimed.
.It Va txq_in_use
Descriptors which have been added to the transmit queue,
but have not yet been cleaned.
This value will include both untransmitted descriptors as well as descriptors
which have been processed.
.It Va txq_cidx_processed
The transmit queue consumer index of the next descriptor to process.
.It Va txq_cidx
The transmit queue consumer index of the oldest descriptor to reclaim.
.It Va txq_pidx
The transmit queue producer index where the next descriptor to transmit will
be inserted.
.It Va no_tx_dma_setup
Number of times DMA mapping a transmit mbuf failed for reasons other than
.Er EFBIG .
.It Va txd_encap_efbig
Number of times DMA mapping a transmit mbuf failed due to requiring too many
segments.
.It Va tx_map_failed
Number of times DMA mapping a transmit mbuf failed for any reason
(sum of no_tx_dma_setup and txd_encap_efbig)
.It Va no_desc_avail
Number of times a descriptor couldn't be added to the transmit ring because
the transmit ring was full.
.It Va mbuf_defrag_failed
Number of times both
.Xr m_collapse 9
and
.Xr m_defrag 9
failed after an
.Er EFBIG
error
result from DMA mapping a transmit mbuf.
.It Va m_pullups
Number of times
.Xr m_pullup 9
was called attempting to parse a header.
.It Va mbuf_defrag
Number of times
.Xr m_defrag 9
was called.
.El
.It Va rxqZ
The following are repeated for each receive queue, where Z is the
receive queue instance number:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va rxq_fl0.credits
Credits currently available in the receive ring.
.It Va rxq_fl0.cidx
Current receive ring consumer index.
.It Va rxq_fl0.pidx
Current receive ring producer index.
.El
.El
.Pp
Additional OIDs useful for driver and iflib development are exposed when the
INVARIANTS and/or WITNESS options are enabled in the kernel.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iflib 9
.Sh HISTORY
This framework was introduced in
.Fx 11.0 .
