.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Michael Gmelin <freebsd@grem.de>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 13, 2018
.Dt IG4 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ig4
.Nd Synopsys DesignWare I2C Controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ig4"
.Cd "device iicbus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ig4_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides access to peripherals attached to an I2C controller.
.Sh HARDWARE
.Nm
supports the I2C controllers based on Synopsys DesignWare IP that can be found
in Intel(R) Core(TM) processors starting from the fourth generation, Intel(R)
Bay Trail, Apollo Lake SoC families, and some AMD systems.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
These
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available:
.Bl -tag -width "debug.ig4_dump"
.It Va debug.ig4_dump
This sysctl is a zero-based bit mask.
When any of the bits are set, a register dump is printed for
every I2C transfer on an
.Nm
device with the same unit number.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr iicbus 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written for DragonFly BSD by
.An Matthew Dillon
and subsequently ported to
.Fx
by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
