.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Gavin Atkinson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\"    - Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    - Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
.\"      copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"      disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided
.\"      with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 24, 2015
.Dt IPHETH 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ipheth
.Nd "USB Apple iPhone/iPad tethered Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ipheth_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to compile this driver into the kernel, place the
following lines in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device uether"
.Cd "device ipheth"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for network access through Apple
iPhone and iPad devices, often referred to as USB tethering.
.Pp
.Nm
should work with any Apple iPhone or iPad device.
In most cases this must be explicitly enabled on the device first.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
The device does not support different media types or options.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following devices are supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Apple iPhone tethering (all models)
.It
Apple iPad tethering (all models)
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cdce 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr urndis 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr usbconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Hans Petter Selasky Aq Mt hselasky@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
Some devices may need to be manually configured to use an alternative
configuration with the
.Xr usbconfig 8
utility.
A command similar to
.Dl usbconfig -u 1 -a 2 set_config 3
may be required if the device is not recognised automatically by
.Nm
after it is connected.
