.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 7, 2009
.Dt IPS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ips
.Nd IBM/Adaptec ServeRAID controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device ips"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ips_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver claims to support the
.Tn IBM
(now Adaptec) ServeRAID series
.Tn SCSI
controller cards.
.Pp
These cards come with a built in configuration utility stored in
the firmware known as the
.Tn ISPR .
This utility is accessed with the
.Aq Em Ctrl+I
key combination during the initial card
.Tn POST .
.Pp
It is highly recommended that this utility be used to configure the card
before attempting to diagnose the below error messages.
.Pp
In some cases, the
.Nm
driver can have difficulties attaching during
the system initialization period.
To avoid these difficulties, set the
.Va hw.ips.0.disable
tunable to 1.
It will prevent the driver from attaching.
.Sh HARDWARE
Controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
IBM ServeRAID 3H
.It
ServeRAID 4L/4M/4H
.It
ServeRAID Series 5
.It
ServeRAID 6i/6M
.It
ServeRAID 7t/7k/7M
.El
.Pp
Newer ServeRAID controllers are supported by the
.Xr aac 4
or
.Xr mfi 4
driver.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Several error codes may be shown when the card initializes the
.Tn IBM
.Tn ISPR
utility and are independent of
.Fx .
.Bl -diag
.It ips%d: failed to get adapter configuration data from device
.It ips%d: failed to get drive configuration data from device
.Pp
Unable to obtain adapter or drive configuration.
.It ips%d iobuf error
.Pp
A buffer input/output error has occurred.
.Bq Er ENXIO
.El
.Ss General adapter errors :
.Bl -diag
.It Attaching bus failed
.Pp
This message is undocumented.
.It WARNING: command timeout. Adapter is in toaster mode, resetting
.Pp
A command timeout has caused the adapter to be reset.
.It AIEE! adapter reset failed, giving up and going home! Have a nice day
.Pp
An error occurred while attempting to reset the adapter.
.It unable to get adapter configuration
.It unable to get drive configuration
.Pp
There was an error when attempting to get configuration information.
.It Adapter error during initialization.
.It adapter initialization failed
.Pp
There was an error while attempting to initialize the adapter.
.It adapter failed config check
.It adapter clear failed
.Pp
There was an error while checking the adapter.
.It device is disabled
.Pp
The adapter is disabled.
.It resource allocation failed
.It irq allocation failed
.It irq setup failed
.Pp
The driver was unable to allocate resources for the device.
.El
.Ss Error messages due to DMA :
.Bl -diag
.It can't alloc command dma tag
.It can't alloc SG dma tag
.It can't alloc dma tag for statue queue
.It dmamap failed
.Pp
Failure to map or allocate DMA resources.
.El
.Ss Cache, buffer, and command errors :
.Bl -diag
.It failed to initialize command buffers
.It no mem for command slots!
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver will return
.Bq Er ENOMEM
in such cases.
.It ERROR: unable to get a command! can't flush cache!
.It ERROR: cache flush command failed!
.It ERROR: unable to get a command! can't update nvram
.It ERROR: nvram update command failed!
.It ERROR: unable to get a command! can't sync cache!
.It ERROR: cache sync command failed!
.It ERROR: unable to get a command! can't sync cache!
.It ERROR: etable command failed!
.El
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
Unlike many of the other
.Tn SCSI
devices in
.Fx ,
the
.Nm
driver does not use the
.Xr cam 4
.Tn SCSI
subsystem.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr aac 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr mfi 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An -nosplit
.An David Jefferys
and
.An Scott Long Aq Mt scottl@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
