.\" Copyright (c) 2007-2010 Daniel Braniss <danny@cs.huji.ac.il>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 9, 2014
.Dt ISCSI_INITIATOR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iscsi_initiator
.Nd kernel driver for the iSCSI protocol
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iscsi_initiator"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
iscsi_initiator_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bf -symbolic
This driver, along with its userspace counterpart
.Xr iscontrol 8 ,
is obsolete.
Users are advised to use
.Xr iscsi 4
instead.
.Ef
.Pp
The
.Nm
implements the kernel side of the Internet SCSI (iSCSI) network
protocol standard, the userland companion is
.Xr iscontrol 8 ,
and permits access to remote
.Em virtual
SCSI devices via
.Xr cam 4 .
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
.Bl -tag -width ".Va net.iscsi.n.targeaddress"
.It Va debug.iscsi_initiator
set the debug-level, 0 means no debugging, 9 for maximum.
.It Va net.iscsi.isid
the initiator part of the Session Identifier.
.It Va "kern.cam.cam_srch_hi=1"
allow search above LUN 7 for SCSI3 and greater devices.
.It "the following are informative only:"
.It Va net.iscsi.driver_version
the current version of the driver.
.It Va net.iscsi.sessions
the number of current active sessions.
.It Va net.iscsi.n.targetname
is the targe name of session
.Em n .
.It Va net.iscsi.n.targeaddress
is the IP address of the target of session
.Em n .
.It Va net.iscsi.n.stats
are some statistics for session
.Em n
.It Va net.iscsi.n.pid
is the
.Em "process id"
of the userland side of session
.Em n ,
see
.Xr iscontrol 8 .
.El
.Sh FILES
The
.Nm
driver creates the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/iscsi%dxx" -compact
.It Pa /dev/iscsi
used to create new sessions.
.It Pa /dev/iscsi%d
for each new session.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8 ,
.Xr iscontrol 8
.Sh STANDARDS
iSCSI RFC 3720
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHORS
This software was written by
.An Daniel Braniss Aq Mt danny@cs.huji.ac.il
.Sh BUGS
The lun discovery method is old-fashioned.
