.\" Copyright (c) 2015, Mellanox Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd June 6, 2016
.Dt ISER 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iser
.Nd iSCSI Extensions for RDMA (iSER) driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iser"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
iser_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
(iSCSI Extensions for RDMA) initiator driver extends the iSCSI protocol to RDMA.
It permits data to be transferred directly into and out of SCSI buffers
without intermediate data copies.
iSER uses the RDMA protocol suite to supply higher bandwidth for
block storage transfers (zero copy behavior).
To that fact, it eliminates the
TCP/IP processing overhead while preserving the compatibility with iSCSI protocol.
The initiator is the iSCSI/iSER client, which connects to an iSCSI/iSER target,
providing local access to a remote block device.
The userland component is provided by
.Xr iscsid 8
and both the kernel and userland are configured using
.Xr iscsictl 8 .
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va kern.iser.debug
Verbosity level for log messages from the
.Nm
driver.
Set to 0 to disable logging or 1 to warn about potential problems.
Larger values enable info and debugging output.
Defaults to 0.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iscsi 4 ,
.Xr iscsi.conf 5 ,
.Xr iscsictl 8 ,
.Xr iscsid 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
subsystem first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
subsystem was developed by
.An Max Gurtovoy Aq Mt maxg@mellanox.com
and
.An Sagi Grimberg Aq Mt sagig@mellanox.com
under sponsorship from Mellanox Technologies.
