.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Intel Corporation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Intel Corporation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\"
.\" ismt driver man page.
.\"
.\" Author: Jim Harris <jimharris@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 11, 2016
.Dt ISMT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ismt
.Nd Intel SMBus Message Transport (SMBus 2.0) driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device pci
.Cd device smbus
.Cd device smb
.Cd device ismt
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides access to the SMBus 2.0 controller device contained
in the Intel Atom S1200 and C2000 CPUs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ichsmb 4 ,
.Xr smb 4 ,
.Xr smbus 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jim Harris Aq Mt jimharris@FreeBSD.org
