.\" Copyright (c) 2009-2018 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Marcus Alves Grando
.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2001 Matthew Jacob, for NASA/Ames Research Center
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 28, 2019
.Dt ISP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm isp
.Nd Qlogic based SPI and FibreChannel SCSI Host Adapters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device isp"
.Cd "device ispfw"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
isp_load="YES"
ispfw_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides access to
.Tn SPI
or
.Tn FibreChannel
SCSI devices.
.Pp
SPI supports initiator mode for Ultra SCSI and wide mode transactions for
.Tn SCSI ,
Ultra2 LVD (1080, 1280), and Ultra3 LVD (10160, 12160).
.Pp
Fibre Channel supports initiator and target modes of FCP SCSI profile,
utilizing Class 3 and Class 2 (2200 and later) connections.
Support is available for Public and Private loops, Point-to-Point
and Fabric connections.
.Pp
FC-Tape is supported on 4Gb (2400) and newer controllers.
FC-Tape is highly recommended for connections to tape drives that support
it.
It encompasses four elements from the T-10 FCP-4 specification:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Precise Delivery of Commands
.It
Confirmed Completion of FCP I/O Operations
.It
Retransmission of Unsuccessfully Transmitted IUs
.It
Task Retry Identification
.El
.Pp
Together these features allow for link level error recovery with tape
devices.
Without it, an initiator cannot, for instance, tell whether a tape write
command that has timed out resulted in all, part or none of the data going to
the tape drive.
FC-Tape is automatically enabled when connecting controller that supports
it to a target that supports it.
It may be disabled using configuration and hint options described below.
.Sh FIRMWARE
Firmware loading is supported if the
.Xr ispfw 4
module is loaded.
It is strongly recommended that you use the firmware available from
.Xr ispfw 4
as it is the most likely to have been tested with this driver.
.Sh HARDWARE
Cards supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxx -offset indent
.It Qlogic 1000
Fast Wide, Ultra Fast Wide cards, Single Ended or Differential SBus cards.
.It Qlogic 1020
Fast Wide and Differential Fast Wide SCSI PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 1040
Ultra Wide and Differential Ultra Wide SCSI PCI cards.
Also known as the DEC KZPBA-CA (single ended) and KZPBA-CB (HVD differential).
.It Qlogic 1080
LVD Ultra2 Wide SCSI PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 10160
LVD Ultra3 Wide SCSI PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 1240
Dual Bus Ultra Wide and Differential Ultra Wide SCSI PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 1280
Dual Bus LVD Ultra2 Wide SCSI PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 12160
Dual Bus LVD Ultra3 Wide SCSI PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 210X
Copper and Optical Fibre Channel Arbitrated Loop PCI cards (single, dual).
.It Qlogic 220X
Copper and Optical Fibre Channel Arbitrated Loop PCI cards (single, dual, quad).
.It Qlogic 2300
Optical 2Gb Fibre Channel PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 2312
Optical 2Gb Fibre Channel PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 234X
Optical 2Gb Fibre Channel PCI cards (2312 chipset, single and dual attach).
.It Qlogic 2322
Optical 2Gb Fibre Channel PCIe cards.
.It Qlogic 200
Dell branded version of the QLogic 2312.
.It Qlogic 2422
Optical 4Gb Fibre Channel PCI cards.
.It Qlogic 246x (aka 2432)
Optical 4Gb Fibre Channel PCIe cards.
.It Qlogic 256x (aka 2532)
Optical 8Gb Fibre Channel PCIe cards.
.It Qlogic 267x/836x (aka 2031/8031)
Optical 16Gb FC/FCoE PCIe cards.
.It Qlogic 2690/2692/2694 (aka 2684/2692)
Optical 16Gb Fibre Channel PCIe cards.
.It Qlogic 2740/2742/2764 (aka 2722/2714)
Optical 32Gb Fibre Channel PCIe cards.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION OPTIONS
Target mode support for Fibre Channel adapters may be enabled with the
.Pp
.Cd options ISP_TARGET_MODE
.Pp
option.
.Pp
To disable FC-Tape, use the following configuration option:
.Pp
.Cd options ISP_FCTAPE_OFF
.Pp
Note that even if the ISP_FCTAPE_OFF option is used, it may be overridden
by the fctape hint described below.
.Sh BOOT OPTIONS
The following options are switchable by setting values in
.Pa /boot/device.hints .
.Pp
They are:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .msi
Limit on number of Message Signaled Interrupts (MSI) to be used.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .msix
Limit on number of Extended Message Signaled Interrupts (MSI-X) to be used.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .fwload_disable
A hint value to disable loading of firmware
.Xr ispfw 4 .
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .ignore_nvram
A hint value to ignore board NVRAM settings for.
Otherwise use NVRAM settings.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .fullduplex
A hint value to set full duplex mode.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .topology
A hint value to select topology of connection.
Supported values are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Li lport-only" -compact
.It Li lport
Prefer loopback and fallback to point to point.
.It Li nport
Prefer point to point and fallback to loopback.
.It Li lport-only
Loopback only.
.It Li nport-only
Point to point only.
.El
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .portwwn
This should be the full 64 bit World Wide Port Name you would like
to use, overriding the value in NVRAM for the card.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .nodewwn
This should be the full 64 bit World Wide Node Name you would like
to use, overriding the value in NVRAM for the card.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .iid
A hint to override or set the Initiator ID or Loop ID.
For Fibre Channel
cards in Local Loop topologies it is
.Ar strongly
recommended that you set this value to non-zero.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .role
A hint to define default role for isp instance (0 -- none, 1 -- target,
2 -- initiator, 3 -- both).
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .debug
A hint value for a driver debug level (see the file
.Pa /usr/src/sys/dev/isp/ispvar.h
for the values.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .vports
A hint to create specified number of additional virtual ports.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .nofctape
Set this to 1 to disable FC-Tape operation on the given isp instance.
.It Va hint.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .fctape
Set this to 1 to enable FC-Tape operation on the given isp instance for
targets that support it.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .loop_down_limit
This value says how long to wait in seconds after loop has gone down before
giving up and expiring all of the devices that were visible.
The default is 300 seconds (5 minutes).
A separate (nonadjustable) timeout is used when
booting to not stop booting on lack of FC connectivity.
.It Va dev.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .gone_device_time
This value says how long to wait for devices to reappear if they (temporarily)
disappear due to loop or fabric events.
While this timeout is running, I/O
to those devices will simply be held.
.It Va dev.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .use_gff_id
.It Va dev.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .use_gft_id
Setting those options to 0 allows to disable use of GFF_ID and GFT_ID SNS
requests during FC fabric scan.
It may be useful if switch does not implement them correctly,
preventing some devices from being found.
Disabling them may cause unneeded logins to ports not supporting target role
or even FCP at all.
The default is 1 (enabled).
.It Va dev.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .wwnn
This is the readonly World Wide Node Name value for this port.
.It Va dev.isp. Ns Ar N Ns Va .wwpn
This is the readonly World Wide Port Name value for this port.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ispfw 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr gmultipath 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Matthew Jacob
originally for NetBSD at NASA/Ames Research Center.
Later improvement was done by
.An Alexander Motin Aq Mt mav@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The driver currently ignores some NVRAM settings.
.Pp
Fabric support for 2100 cards has been so problematic, and these cards are so
old now that it is just not worth your time to try it.
