.\"	$OpenBSD: it.4,v 1.25 2015/09/10 15:16:43 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007-2008 Oleg Safiullin <form@pdp-11.org.ru>
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Julien Bordet <zejames@greygats.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 10 2015 $
.Dt IT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm it
.Nd ITE IT87xxF and SiS SiS950 temperature, voltage, and fan sensor with \
watchdog timer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "it* at isa? port 0x2e"
.Cd "it* at isa? port 0x4e"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
ITE IT8705F, IT8712F, IT8716F, IT8718F, IT8720F, IT8726F, IT8728F, IT8772F
and SiS SiS950
hardware monitors and
.Xr watchdog 4
timer to be used with the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface.
.Pp
Most supported devices possess 17 sensors:
.Bl -column "Sensor" "Units" "Typical" -offset indent
.It Sy "Sensor" Ta Sy "Units" Ta Sy "Typical Use"
.It Li "temp0" Ta "uK" Ta "CPU Temperature"
.It Li "temp1" Ta "uK" Ta "Motherboard Temperature"
.It Li "temp2" Ta "uK" Ta "Unused"
.It Li "fan0" Ta "RPM" Ta "CPU Fan"
.It Li "fan1" Ta "RPM" Ta "Chassis Fan"
.It Li "fan2" Ta "RPM" Ta "Power Fan"
.It Li "fan3" Ta "RPM" Ta "Unused"
.It Li "fan4" Ta "RPM" Ta "Unused"
.It Li "volt0" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Core voltage"
.It Li "volt1" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Core voltage"
.It Li "volt2" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+3.3V"
.It Li "volt3" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+5V"
.It Li "volt4" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+12V"
.It Li "volt5" Ta "uV DC" Ta "-12V"
.It Li "volt6" Ta "uV DC" Ta "-5V"
.It Li "volt7" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+5VSB"
.It Li "volt8" Ta "uV DC" Ta "VBAT"
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr watchdogd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.4 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written for
.Ox 3.4
by
.An Julien Bordet Aq Mt zejames@greyhats.org ,
and completely rewritten for
.Ox 4.3
by
.An Oleg Safiullin Aq Mt form@pdp-11.org.ru .
.Sh BUGS
Watchdog timer functionality is not supported for ITE IT8705
or SiS SiS950 chips.
For older IT8712 chips,
watchdog timeout values of more than 255 seconds
are rounded up to the nearest minute.
