.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 30, 2014
.Dt IWNFW 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iwnfw
.Nd "Firmware Module for Intel Wireless driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this module into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iwnfw"
.Ed
.Pp
This will include firmware images for all
.Xr iwn 4
devices inside the kernel.
If you want to pick only the firmware image for your network adapter choose one
of the following:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iwn1000fw"
.Cd "device iwn100fw"
.Cd "device iwn105fw"
.Cd "device iwn135fw"
.Cd "device iwn2000fw"
.Cd "device iwn2030fw"
.Cd "device iwn4965fw"
.Cd "device iwn5000fw"
.Cd "device iwn5150fw"
.Cd "device iwn6000fw"
.Cd "device iwn6000g2afw"
.Cd "device iwn6000g2bfw"
.Cd "device iwn6050fw"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
iwn1000fw_load="YES"
iwn100fw_load="YES"
iwn105fw_load="YES"
iwn135fw_load="YES"
iwn2000fw_load="YES"
iwn2030fw_load="YES"
iwn4965fw_load="YES"
iwn5000fw_load="YES"
iwn5150fw_load="YES"
iwn6000fw_load="YES"
iwn6000g2afw_load="YES"
iwn6000g2bfw_load="YES"
iwn6050fw_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This module provides access to firmware sets for the
Intel Wireless WiFi Link 100, 105, 135, 1000, 2000, 2030, 4965, 5000 and 6000 series of
IEEE 802.11n adapters.
It may be
statically linked into the kernel, or loaded as a module.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iwn 4 ,
.Xr firmware 9
