.\" $OpenBSD: iwx.4,v 1.21 2025/03/27 15:12:14 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Stefan Sperling <stsp@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 27 2025 $
.Dt IWX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iwx
.Nd Intel AX200/AX201/AX210/AX211 IEEE 802.11a/ac/ax/b/g/n wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "iwx* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Intel Wireless AX200/AX210 M.2 network adapters,
and for Intel Wireless AX201/AX211 Integrated Connectivity (CNVi) network
adapters with companion RF M.2 modules.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
The
.Nm
driver offloads both encryption and decryption of unicast data frames to the
hardware for the CCMP cipher.
.Pp
In BSS mode the driver supports background scanning;
see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The driver needs one of the following firmware files,
which are loaded when an interface is brought up:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-cc-a0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-Qu-b0-hr-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-Qu-b0-jf-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-Qu-c0-hr-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-Qu-c0-jf-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-QuZ-a0-hr-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-QuZ-a0-jf-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-so-a0-gf-a0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-so-a0-gf4-a0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-so-a0-hr-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-so-a0-jf-b0-77
.It Pa /etc/firmware/iwx-ty-a0-gf-a0-77
.El
.Pp
These firmware files are not free because Intel refuses to grant
distribution rights without contractual obligations.
As a result, even though
.Ox
includes the driver, the firmware files cannot be included and
users have to download these files on their own.
.Pp
A prepackaged version of the firmware can be installed using
.Xr fw_update 8 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig iwx0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures iwx0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
join mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "iwx0: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwx0: fatal firmware error"
For some reason, the firmware crashed.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwx0: radio is disabled by hardware switch"
The radio transmitter is off and thus no packet can go out.
The driver will reset the hardware.
Make sure the laptop radio switch is on.
.It "iwx0: could not read firmware ... (error N)"
For some reason, the driver was unable to read the firmware image from the
filesystem.
The file might be missing or corrupted.
.It "iwx0: firmware too short: N bytes"
The firmware image is corrupted and can't be loaded into the adapter.
.It "iwx0: could not load firmware"
An attempt to load the firmware into the adapter failed.
The driver will reset the hardware.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 6.7 .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver does not support any of the 802.11ax capabilities offered
by the adapters.
Additional work is required in
.Xr ieee80211 9
before those features can be supported.
