.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2018, Intel Corporation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"     this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"  3. Neither the name of the Intel Corporation nor the names of its
.\"     contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"     this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 30, 2019
.Dt IXL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ixl
.Nd "Intel Ethernet 700 Series Driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iflib"
.Cd "device ixl"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ixl_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss Features
The
.Nm
driver provides support for any PCI Express adapter or LOM
(LAN On Motherboard)
in the Intel Ethernet 700 Series.
As of this writing, the series includes devices with these model numbers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
XL710 (40G)
.It
X710 (10G)
.It
XXV710 (25G)
.It
X722 (10G)
.El
.Pp
The driver supports Jumbo Frames, TX/RX checksum offload,
TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO), VLAN
tag insertion/extraction, VLAN checksum offload, VLAN TSO, and
Receive Side Steering (RSS), all for both IPv4 and IPv6.
For further hardware information and questions related to hardware
requirements, see
.Pa http://support.intel.com/ .
.Pp
Support for Jumbo Frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit Jumbo Frames.
The maximum MTU size for Jumbo Frames is 9706.
.Pp
Offloads are also controlled via the interface, for instance,
checksumming for both IPv4 and IPv6 can be set and unset, TSO4
and/or TSO6, and finally LRO can be set and unset.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Ss Additional Utilities
There are additional tools available from Intel to help configure and update
the adapters covered by this driver.
These tools can be downloaded directly from Intel at
.Pa downloadcenter.intel.com ,
by searching for their names, or by installing certain packages:
.Bl -item
.It
To change the behavior of the QSFP+ ports on XL710 adapters, use the
Intel QCU (QSFP+ configuration utility); installed by the
.Em sysutils/intel-qcu
package.
.It
To update the firmware on an adapter, use the Intel Non-Volatile Memory (NVM)
Update Utility; installed by the
.Em sysutils/intel-nvmupdate
package.
.It
Drivers are provided by Intel outside of the
.Fx
kernel; install the
.Em net/intel-ixl-kmod
package for the latest driver.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
Most adapters in the Intel Ethernet 700 Series with SFP+/SFP28/QSFP+ cages
have firmware that requires that Intel qualified modules are used; these
qualified modules are listed below.
This qualification check cannot be disabled by the driver.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports 40Gb Ethernet adapters with these QSFP+ modules:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Intel 4x10G/40G QSFP+ 40GBASE-SR4 E40GQSFPSR
.It
Intel 4x10G/40G QSFP+ 40GBASE-LR4 E40GQSFPLR
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports 25Gb Ethernet adapters with these SFP28 modules:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Intel 10G/25G SFP28 25GBASE-SR E25GSFP28SR
.It
Intel 10G/25G SFP28 25GBASE-SR E25GSFP28SRX (Extended Temp)
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports 25Gb and 10Gb Ethernet adapters with these SFP+ modules:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Intel 1G/10G SFP+ SR FTLX8571D3BCV-IT
.It
Intel 1G/10G SFP+ SR AFBR-703SDZ-IN2
.It
Intel 1G/10G SFP+ LR FTLX1471D3BCV-IT
.It
Intel 1G/10G SFP+ LR AFCT-701SDZ-IN2
.It
Intel 1G/10G SFP+ 10GBASE-SR E10GSFPSR
.It
Intel 10G SFP+ 10GBASE-SR E10GSFPSRX (Extended Temp)
.It
Intel 1G/10G SFP+ 10GBASE-LR E10GSFPLR
.El
.Pp
Note that adapters also support all passive and active
limiting direct attach cables that comply with SFF-8431 v4.1 and
SFF-8472 v10.4 specifications.
.Pp
This is not an exhaustive list; please consult product documentation for an
up-to-date list of supported media.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.ixl.rx_itr
The RX interrupt rate value, set to 62 (124 usec) by default.
.It Va hw.ixl.tx_itr
The TX interrupt rate value, set to 122 (244 usec) by default.
.It Va hw.ixl.i2c_access_method
Access method that driver will use for I2C read and writes via
.Xr sysctl 8
or verbose
.Xr ifconfig 8
information display:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
0 - best available method
1 - bit bang via I2CPARAMS register
2 - register read/write via I2CCMD register
3 - Use Admin Queue command (default best)
.Ed
.Pp
Using the Admin Queue is only supported on 710 devices with FW version 1.7 or
newer.
Set to 0 by default.
.It Va hw.ixl.enable_tx_fc_filter
Filter out packets with Ethertype 0x8808 from being sent out by non-adapter
sources.
This prevents (potentially untrusted) software or
.Xr iavf 4
devices from sending out flow control packets and creating a DoS (Denial of
Service) event.
Enabled by default.
.It Va hw.ixl.enable_head_writeback
When the driver is finding the last TX descriptor processed by the hardware,
use a value written to memory by the hardware instead of scanning the
descriptor ring for completed descriptors.
Enabled by default; disable to mimic the TX behavior found in
.Xr ixgbe 4 .
.El
.Sh SYSCTL PROCEDURES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.ixl.#.fc
Sets the 802.3x flow control mode that the adapter will advertise on the link.
A value of 0 disables flow control, 3 enables full, 1 is RX, and 2 is TX pause.
.Pp
The negotiated flow control setting can be viewed in
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
in the interface's media field.
.It Va dev.ixl.#.advertise_speed
Set the speeds that the interface will advertise on the link.
.Va dev.ixl.#.supported_speeds
contains the speeds that are allowed to be set.
.It Va dev.ixl.#.current_speed
Displays the current speed.
.It Va dev.ixl.#.fw_version
Displays the current firmware and NVM versions of the adapter.
.El
.Sh INTERRUPT STORMS
It is important to note that 40G operation can generate high
numbers of interrupts, often incorrectly being interpreted as
a storm condition in the kernel.
It is suggested that this be resolved by setting:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.intr_storm_threshold: 0
.El
.Sh IOVCTL OPTIONS
The driver supports additional optional parameters for created VFs
(Virtual Functions) when using
.Xr iovctl 8 :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It mac-addr Pq unicast-mac
Set the Ethernet MAC address that the VF will use.
If unspecified, the VF will use a randomly generated MAC address.
.It mac-anti-spoof Pq bool
Prevent the VF from sending Ethernet frames with a source address
that does not match its own.
.It allow-set-mac Pq bool
Allow the VF to set its own Ethernet MAC address
.It allow-promisc Pq bool
Allow the VF to inspect all of the traffic sent to the port.
.It num-queues Pq uint16_t
Specify the number of queues the VF will have.
By default, this is set to the number of MSI-X vectors supported by the VF
minus one.
.El
.Pp
An up to date list of parameters and their defaults can be found by using
.Xr iovctl 8
with the -S option.
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Intel support website at:
.Pa http://support.intel.com/ .
.Pp
If an issue is identified with this driver with a supported adapter,
email all the specific information related to the issue to
.Mt freebsd@intel.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr iavf 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr iovctl 8 ,
.Xr iflib 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.1 .
It was converted to use
.Xr iflib 9
in
.Fx 12 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jack Vogel Aq Mt jfv@freebsd.org
and
.An Eric Joyner Aq Mt erj@freebsd.org .
