.\" $OpenBSD: kue.4,v 1.21 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\" $NetBSD: kue.4,v 1.5 2000/03/20 01:34:22 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000
.\"     Bill Paul <wpaul@ee.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/kue.4,v 1.2 2000/01/07 22:18:48 wpaul Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt KUE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kue
.Nd Kawasaki LSI KL5KUSB101B USB Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "kue* at uhub?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB Ethernet adapters based on the Kawasaki
LSI KL5KLUSB101B chipset.
This includes the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Tn 3Com 3c19250
.It Tn 3Com 3c460 HomeConnect
.It Tn AboCom Systems URE450 Ethernet
.It Tn ADS Technologies USB-10BT
.It Tn Aox USB101
.It Tn Asante USB to Ethernet
.It Tn ATen DSB-650C
.It Tn ATen UC10T
.It Tn Corega USB-T
.It Tn D-Link DSB-650C
.It Tn Entrega NET-USB-E45
.It Tn I/O Data USB-ET/T
.It Tn Jaton USB XpressNet
.It Tn Kawasaki USB101
.It Tn Kingston Ethernet
.It Tn Linksys USB10T
.It Tn Mobility Ethernet
.It Tn Netgear EA101
.It Tn Peracom USB
.It Tn Portgear Ethernet
.It Tn Portsmith Express Ethernet
.It Tn Psion Dacom Gold Port Ethernet
.It Tn Shark Pocket Adapter
.It Tn Silicom U2E
.It Tn SMC 2102USB
.It Tn SMC 2104USB
.El
.Pp
The KL5KLUSB101B supports a 128-entry multicast filter, single perfect
filter entry for the station address and promiscuous mode.
Packets are
received and transmitted over separate USB bulk transfer endpoints.
.Pp
The Kawasaki adapter supports only 10Mbps half-duplex mode, hence there
are no
.Xr ifmedia 4
modes to select.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh FILES
The driver needs a firmware file,
which is loaded on demand when the device is attached:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/kue
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "kue0: watchdog timeout"
A packet was queued for transmission and a transmit command was
issued, however the device failed to acknowledge the transmission
before a timeout expired.
.It "kue0: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Ox
support was added in
.Ox 2.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ee.columbia.edu
and ported to
.Ox
by
.An Aaron Campbell Aq Mt aaron@openbsd.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver does not accumulate Ethernet collisions statistics because the
Kawasaki firmware does not appear to maintain any internal statistics.
