.\"	$OpenBSD: lc.4,v 1.13 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: lc.4,v 1.4 1999/12/15 22:07:32 abs Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jason R. Thorpe of the Numerical Aerospace Simulation Facility,
.\" NASA Ames Research Center.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt LC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lc
.Nd DEC EtherWORKS III 10/100 Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "lc0 at isa? port 0x200"
.Cd "lc1 at isa? port 0x280"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports DEC EtherWORKS III Ethernet interfaces, which
are based on the LEMAC Ethernet chip.
This includes the DE203, DE204, and DE205.
.Sh MEDIA SELECTION
The EtherWORKS III series supports various combinations of media, depending
on model.
Some models also support media autoselect.
Media is selected with
.Xr ifconfig 8 Ns 's
.Sq media
directive.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.3 ,
.Ox
support was added in
.Ox 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Matt Thomas Aq Mt matt@netbsd.org
and ported to
.Ox
by
.An Niklas Hallqvist Aq Mt niklas@openbsd.org
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
does not currently support EISA LEMAC interfaces.
