.\"  BSD LICENSE
.\"
.\"  Copyright(c) 2017 Cavium, Inc.. All rights reserved.
.\"  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\"  are met:
.\"
.\"    * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"      the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"      distribution.
.\"    * Neither the name of Cavium, Inc. nor the names of its
.\"      contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"      from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\"  "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\"  LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\"  A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\"  OWNER(S) OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\"  SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\"  LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\"  DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\"  THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\"  (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"  OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 17, 2017
.Dt LIQUIDIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm liquidio
.Nd "Cavium 10Gb/25Gb Ethernet driver for the FreeBSD operating system"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device lio"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_lio_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for 23XX 10Gb/25Gb Ethernet adapters.
The driver supports Jumbo Frames, Transmit/Receive checksum
offload, TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO),
VLAN tag insertion/extraction, VLAN checksum offload,
VLAN TSO, and Receive Side Steering (RSS)
.Pp
Support for Jumbo Frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit Jumbo Frames.
The maximum MTU size for Jumbo Frames is 16000.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see ifconfig(8).
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
LiquidIO II CN2350 210SV/225SV
.It
LiquidIO II CN2360 210SV/225SV
.El
.Sh LOADER TUBABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.lio.fw_type
.Pp
String that specifies type of firmware to be loaded.
Default is "nic". Use "none" to load firmware from flash.
.It Va hw.lio.num_queues_per_pf0
.Pp
Unsigned integers that specify number of queues per PF0.
Valid range is 0 to 64.
Use 0 to derive autoconfigures based on the number of
cpus with a max of 8
.It Va hw.lio.num_queues_per_pf1
.Pp
Unsigned integers that specify number of queues per PF1.
Valid range is 0 to 64.
Use 0 to derive autoconfigures based on the number of
cpus with a max of 8
.It Va hw.lio.console_bitmask
.Pp
Bitmask indicating which consoles have debug output
redirected to syslog.
.It Va hw.lio.rss
.Pp
To enable/disable driver RSS support
.It Va hw.lio.hwlro
.Pp
To enable/disable hardware LRO
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Cavium support website at:
.Pa http://support.cavium.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Derek Chickles Aq Mt derek.chickles@cavium.com .
