.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 A.R.Gordon, andrew.gordon@net-tel.co.uk
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	Id: man4.i386/lp.4,v 1.9 1999/02/14 12:06:16 nsouch Exp
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 4, 1996
.Dt LP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lp
.Nd printer port Internet Protocol driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ifconfig
.Ar plip0
.Ar myaddress hisaddress
.Op Fl link0
.Pp
.Cd "device ppbus"
.Cd "device plip"
.Cd "device ppc"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver allows a PC parallel printer port to be used as a
point-to-point network interface between two similarly configured systems.
Data is transferred 4 bits at a time, using the printer status lines for
input: hence there is no requirement for special bidirectional hardware
and any standard AT-compatible printer port with working interrupts may be used.
.Pp
During the boot process, for each
.Nm plip
device which is probed and has an interrupt assigned, a corresponding
.Nm network
device is created.
.Pp
Configuring an
.Nm
device with
.Xr ifconfig 8
causes the corresponding
.Nm parallel port bus
to be reserved for PLIP until the network interface is configured 'down'.
.Pp
The communication protocol is selected by the
.Cm link0
flag:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl link0
(default) Use
.Fx
mode (LPIP).
This is the simpler of the two modes
and therefore slightly more efficient.
.It Cm link0
Use Crynwr/Linux compatible mode (CLPIP).
This mode has a simulated Ethernet
packet header, and is easier to interface to other types of equipment.
.El
.Pp
The interface MTU defaults to 1500, but may be set to any value.
Both ends
of the link must be configured with the same MTU.
.Ss Cable Connections
The cable connecting the two parallel ports should be wired as follows:
.Bd -literal
	Pin	Pin	Description
	2	15	Data0 -> ERROR*
	3	13	Data1 -> SLCT
	4	12	Data2 -> PE
	5	10	Data3 -> ACK*
	6	11	Data4 -> BUSY
	15	2	ERROR* -> Data0
	13	3	SLCT   -> Data1
	12	4	PE     -> Data2
	10	5	ACK*   -> Data3
	11	6	BUSY   -> Data4
	18-25	18-25	Ground
.Ed
.Pp
Cables with this wiring are widely available as 'Laplink' cables, and
are often coloured yellow.
.Pp
The connections are symmetric, and provide 5 lines in each direction (four
data plus one handshake).
The two modes use the same wiring, but make a
different choice of which line to use as handshake.
.Ss FreeBSD LPIP mode
The signal lines are used as follows:
.Bl -tag -width dataxxxx(Pinxx)
.It Em Data0 (Pin 2)
Data out, bit 0.
.It Em Data1 (Pin 3)
Data out, bit 1.
.It Em Data2 (Pin 4)
Data out, bit 2.
.It Em Data3 (Pin 5)
Handshake out.
.It Em Data4 (Pin 6)
Data out, bit 3.
.It Em ERROR* (pin 15)
Data in, bit 0.
.It Em SLCT (pin 13)
Data in, bit 1.
.It Em PE (pin 12)
Data in, bit 2.
.It Em BUSY (pin 11)
Data in, bit 3.
.It Em ACK* (pin 10)
Handshake in.
.El
.Pp
When idle, all data lines are at zero.
Each byte is signalled in four steps:
sender writes the 4 most significant bits and raises the handshake line;
receiver reads the 4 bits and raises its handshake to acknowledge;
sender places the 4 least significant bits on the data lines and lowers
the handshake; receiver reads the data and lowers its handshake.
.Pp
The packet format has a two-byte header, comprising the fixed values 0x08,
0x00, immediately followed by the IP header and data.
.Pp
The start of a packet is indicated by simply signalling the first byte
of the header.
The end of the packet is indicated by inverting
the data lines (i.e., writing the ones-complement of the previous nibble
to be transmitted) without changing the state of the handshake.
.Pp
Note that the end-of-packet marker assumes that the handshake signal and
the data-out bits can be written in a single instruction - otherwise
certain byte values in the packet data would falsely be interpreted
as end-of-packet.
This is not a problem for the PC printer port,
but requires care when implementing this protocol on other equipment.
.Ss Crynwr/Linux CLPIP mode
The signal lines are used as follows:
.Bl -tag -width dataxxxx(Pinxx)
.It Em Data0 (Pin 2)
Data out, bit 0.
.It Em Data1 (Pin 3)
Data out, bit 1.
.It Em Data2 (Pin 4)
Data out, bit 2.
.It Em Data3 (Pin 5)
Data out, bit 3.
.It Em Data4 (Pin 6)
Handshake out.
.It Em ERROR* (pin 15)
Data in, bit 0.
.It Em SLCT (pin 13)
Data in, bit 1.
.It Em PE (pin 12)
Data in, bit 2.
.It Em ACK* (pin 10)
Data in, bit 3.
.It Em BUSY (pin 11)
Handshake in.
.El
.Pp
When idle, all data lines are at zero.
Each byte is signalled in four steps:
sender writes the 4 least significant bits and raises the handshake line;
receiver reads the 4 bits and raises its handshake to acknowledge;
sender places the 4 most significant bits on the data lines and lowers
the handshake; receiver reads the data and lowers its handshake.
[Note that this is the opposite nibble order to LPIP mode].
.Pp
Packet format is:
.Bd -literal
Length (least significant byte)
Length (most significant byte)
12 bytes of supposed MAC addresses (ignored by FreeBSD).
Fixed byte 0x08
Fixed byte 0x00
<IP datagram>
Checksum byte.
.Ed
.Pp
The length includes the 14 header bytes, but not the length bytes themselves
nor the checksum byte.
.Pp
The checksum is a simple arithmetic sum of all the bytes (again, including
the header but not checksum or length bytes).
.Fx
calculates
outgoing checksums, but does not validate incoming ones.
.Pp
The start of packet has to be signalled specially, since the line chosen
for handshake-in cannot be used to generate an interrupt.
The sender writes the value 0x08 to the data lines, and waits for the receiver
to respond by writing 0x01 to its data lines.
The sender then starts
signalling the first byte of the packet (the length byte).
.Pp
End of packet is deduced from the packet length and is not signalled
specially (although the data lines are restored to the zero, idle
state to avoid spuriously indicating the start of the next packet).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ppbus 4 ,
.Xr ppc 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh BUGS
Busy-waiting loops are used while handshaking bytes, (and worse still when
waiting for the receiving system to respond to an interrupt for the start
of a packet).
Hence a fast system talking to a slow one will consume
excessive amounts of CPU.
This is unavoidable in the case of CLPIP mode
due to the choice of handshake lines; it could theoretically be improved
in the case of LPIP mode.
.Pp
Polling timeouts are controlled by counting loop iterations rather than
timers, and so are dependent on CPU speed.
This is somewhat stabilised
by the need to perform (slow) ISA bus cycles to actually read the port.
