.\"   $OpenBSD: maestro.4,v 1.16 2015/01/15 20:37:36 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Marc Espie.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 15 2015 $
.Dt MAESTRO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm maestro
.Nd ESS Maestro 1 and 2 audio device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "maestro* at pci?"
.Cd "audio* at maestro?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports ESS maestro 1, 2 and 2E, including OEM products that
identify as NEC Versa, or NEC VersaProNX VA26D, as long as they use
an AC'97 compliant codec, which is always the case, except for very
early models.
It does not support maestro 3 cards, which are entirely different and
supported by the
.Xr esa 4
driver.
.Pp
Maestro cards have direct support for 16 bit signed little-endian
mono and stereo, 8 bit signed and unsigned mono and stereo.
Other encodings are emulated in software.
Sampling range is 4000 - 48000 Hz, with roughly a 2 Hz resolution.
.Pp
Maestro cards have some DSP and Dolby Digital 5.1 hardware, but this driver
does not support it.
.Pp
Other functions of maestro cards (modem, joystick) are not supported.
.Pp
PCI interrupt sharing works, as long as other devices comply too.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ac97 4 ,
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr esa 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4
.Sh HISTORY
Maestro hardware information was gleaned from the
.Fx
and Linux OSS drivers.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An David Leonard
and
.An Marc Espie .
.Sh BUGS
Very old cards with a PT101 mixer component should have partial support, e.g.,
the mixer does not work.
.Pp
Recording should work soon.
