.\"	$NetBSD: mk48txx.4,v 1.16 2009/04/10 17:14:07 joerg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2002 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Paul Kranenburg.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 25, 2009
.Dt MK48TXX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mk48txx
.Nd
.Tn Mostek
time-of-day clock driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/eventhandler.h
.In sys/lock.h
.In sys/mutex.h
.In dev/mk48txx/mk48txxvar.h
.Pp
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device mk48txx"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver is a back-end for several models of
.Tn Mostek
time-of-day clock chips.
It provides access methods to retrieve and set date and time for use with the
.Dq Li clock
KOBJ interface.
.Pp
To tie an instance of this device to the system, use the
.Fn mk48txx_attach
function and the mk48txx_softc structure defined as follows:
.Pp
.Ft "int"
.Fn mk48txx_attach "device_t dev"
.Bd -literal
typedef uint8_t (*mk48txx_nvrd_t)(device_t dev, int off);
typedef void (*mk48txx_nvwr_t)(device_t dev, int off, uint8_t v);
.Ed
.Bd -literal
struct mk48txx_softc {
	struct resource	sc_res;
	struct mtx	sc_mtx;
	eventhandler_tag	sc_wet;
	const char	*sc_model;
	bus_size_t	sc_nvramsz;
	bus_size_t	sc_clkoffset;
	u_int		sc_year0;
	u_int		sc_flag;
	mk48txx_nvrd_t	sc_nvrd;
	mk48txx_nvwr_t	sc_nvwr;
};
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fa sc_res
The bus resource used for accessing the chip's non-volatile memory
.Pq including the clock registers ,
which must be supplied by the front-end when using the default access methods
.Pq see below .
Otherwise this member is optional.
.It Fa sc_mtx
The hardware mutex used when accessing the chip's non-volatile memory
.Pq including the clock registers ,
which must be initialized with
.Dv MTX_DEF
by the front-end.
.It Fa sc_wet
The event handler tag for the watchdog functionality,
which is registered by the
.Fn mk48txx_attach
function if supported by the chip and specified as part of the
machine-dependent features
.Pq see below .
.It Fa sc_model
The chip model which this instance should serve.
This member must be set to one of
.Dq mk48t02 ,
.Dq mk48t08 ,
.Dq mk48t18 ,
or
.Dq mk48t59
by the front-end.
.It Fa sc_nvramsz
The size of the non-volatile RAM in the
.Tn Mostek
chip,
which is set by the
.Fn mk48txx_attach
function.
.It Fa sc_clkoffset
The offset into the control registers of the
.Tn Mostek
chip,
which is set by the
.Fn mk48txx_attach
function.
.It Fa sc_year0
The year offset to be used with the
.Sq year
counter of the clock,
which must be set by the front-end.
This value is generally dependent on the system configuration in which
the clock device is mounted.
For instance, on
.Tn Sun Microsystems
machines the convention is to have clock's two-digit year represent
the year since 1968.
.It Fa sc_flag
This flag is used to specify machine-dependent features.
The following flags are supported:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv MK48TXX_WDOG_ENABLE_WDS"
.It Dv MK48TXX_NO_CENT_ADJUST
If the resulting date retrieved with the
.Dq Li clock_gettime() method
would be earlier than January 1, 1970,
the driver will assume that the chip's year counter actually represents a
year in the 21st century.
This behavior can be overridden by setting this flag,
which causes the
.Nm
driver to respect the clock's century bit instead.
.It Dv MK48TXX_WDOG_REGISTER
When this flag is set,
the
.Nm
driver will register as a watchdog via the interface defined in
.Xr watchdog 9
if supported by the specific chip model.
.It Dv MK48TXX_WDOG_ENABLE_WDS
When this flag is set,
the
.Nm
driver will set the watchdog steering
.Pq WDS
bit when enabling the watchdog functionality of the chip.
enabled
.Pq see the chip documentation for further information regarding the WDS bit .
.El
.It Fa sc_nvread
.It Fa sc_nvwrite
These members specify the access methods for reading respectively writing
clock device registers.
The default,
when
.Dv NULL
is passed as an access method,
is to access the chip memory
.Pq and clock registers
as if they were direct-mapped using the specified bus resource.
.Pp
Otherwise, the driver will call the respective function supplied by the
front-end to perform the access,
passing it the offset
.Va off
of the chip memory
.Pq or clock register
location to be read from or written to, respectively.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The following models are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -offset indent -compact
.It Tn Mostek MK48T02
.It Tn Mostek MK48T08
.It Tn Mostek MK48T18
.It Tn Mostek MK48T59
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm mk48txx
driver appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
The first
.Fx
version to include it was
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written for
.Nx
by
.An Paul Kranenburg Aq Mt pk@NetBSD.org .
It was ported to
.Fx
by
.An Thomas Moestl Aq Mt tmm@FreeBSD.org
and later on improved by
.An Marius Strobl Aq Mt marius@FreeBSD.org .
