.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 David O'Brien
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Jeroen Ruigrok van der Werven
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Michael Smith
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 15, 2017
.Dt MLX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mlx
.Nd Mylex DAC-family RAID driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device mlx"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mlx_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Mylex DAC-family PCI to SCSI RAID controllers,
including versions relabeled by Digital/Compaq.
.Sh HARDWARE
Controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Mylex DAC960P
.It
Mylex DAC960PD / DEC KZPSC (Fast Wide)
.It
Mylex DAC960PDU
.It
Mylex DAC960PL
.It
Mylex DAC960PJ
.It
Mylex DAC960PG
.It
Mylex DAC960PU / DEC PZPAC (Ultra Wide)
.It
Mylex AcceleRAID 150 (DAC960PRL)
.It
Mylex AcceleRAID 250 (DAC960PTL1)
.It
Mylex eXtremeRAID 1100 (DAC1164P)
.It
RAIDarray 230 controllers, aka the Ultra-SCSI DEC KZPAC-AA (1-ch, 4MB
cache), KZPAC-CA (3-ch, 4MB), KZPAC-CB (3-ch, 8MB cache)
.El
.Pp
All major firmware revisions (2.x, 3.x, 4.x and 5.x) are supported, however
it is always advisable to upgrade to the most recent firmware
available for the controller.
.Pp
Compatible Mylex controllers not listed should work, but have not been
verified.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Ss Controller initialisation phase
.Bl -diag
.It mlx%d: controller initialisation in progress...
.It mlx%d: initialisation complete
.Pp
The controller firmware is performing/has completed initialisation.
.It mlx%d: physical drive %d:%d not responding
.Pp
The drive at channel:target is not responding; it may have failed or
been removed.
.It mlx%d: spinning up drives...
.Pp
Drive startup is in progress; this may take several minutes.
.It mlx%d: configuration checksum error
.Pp
The array configuration has become corrupted.
.It mlx%d: mirror race recovery in progress
.It mlx%d: mirror race on a critical system drive
.It mlx%d: mirror race recovery failed
.Pp
These error codes are undocumented.
.It mlx%d: physical drive %d:%d COD mismatch
.Pp
Configuration data on the drive at channel:target does not match the
rest of the array.
.It mlx%d: system drive installation aborted
.Pp
Errors occurred preventing one or more system drives from being configured.
.It mlx%d: new controller configuration found
.Pp
The controller has detected a configuration on disk which supersedes the
configuration in its nonvolatile memory.
It will reset and come up with the new configuration.
.It mlx%d: FATAL MEMORY PARITY ERROR
.Pp
Firmware detected a fatal memory error; the driver will not attempt to
attach to this controller.
.It mlx%d: unknown firmware initialisation error %x:%x:%x
.Pp
An unknown error occurred during initialisation; it will be ignored.
.El
.Ss Driver initialisation/shutdown phase:
.Bl -diag
.It mlx%d: can't allocate scatter/gather DMA tag
.It mlx%d: can't allocate buffer DMA tag
.It mlx%d: can't allocate s/g table
.It mlx%d: can't make initial s/g list mapping
.It mlx%d: can't make permanent s/g list mapping
.It mlx%d: can't allocate interrupt
.It mlx%d: can't set up interrupt
.Pp
A resource allocation error occurred while initialising the driver;
initialisation has failed and the driver will not attach to this
controller.
.It mlx%d: error fetching drive status
.Pp
The current status of all system drives could not be fetched; attachment
of system drives will be aborted.
.It mlx%d: device_add_child failed
.It mlx%d: bus_generic_attach returned %d
.Pp
Creation of the system drive instances failed; attachment of one or more
system drives may have been aborted.
.It mlxd%d: detaching...
.Pp
The indicated system drive is being detached.
.It mlxd%d: still open, can't detach
.Pp
The indicated system drive is still open or mounted;
the controller cannot be detached.
.It mlx%d: flushing cache...
.Pp
The controller cache is being flushed prior to detach or shutdown.
.El
.Ss Operational diagnostics:
.Bl -diag
.It mlx%d: ENQUIRY failed - %s
.It mlx%d: ENQUIRY2 failed
.It mlx%d: ENQUIRY_OLD failed
.It mlx%d: FLUSH failed - %s
.It mlx%d: CHECK ASYNC failed - %s
.It mlx%d: REBUILD ASYNC failed - %s
.It mlx%d: command failed - %s
.Pp
The controller rejected a command for the reason given.
.It mlx%d: I/O beyond end of unit (%u,%d > %u)
.It mlx%d: I/O error - %s
.Pp
An I/O error was reported by the controller.
.It mlx%d: periodic enquiry failed - %s
.Pp
An attempt to poll the controller for status failed for the reason given.
.It mlx%d: mlx_periodic_enquiry: unknown command %x
.Pp
The periodic status poll has issued a command which has become corrupted.
.It mlxd%d: drive offline
.It mlxd%d: drive online
.It mlxd%d: drive critical
.Pp
The system disk indicated has changed state.
.It mlx%d: physical drive %d:%d reset
.It mlx%d: physical drive %d:%d killed %s
.It "mlx%d: physical drive %d:%d error log: sense = %d asc = %x asq = %x"
.It "mlx%d:   info %4D csi %4D"
.Pp
The drive at channel:target has been reset, killed for the given reason,
or experienced a SCSI error.
.It mlx%d: unknown log message type %x
.It mlx%d: error reading message log - %s
.Pp
An error occurred while trying to read the controller's message log.
.It mlxd%d: consistency check started
.It mlx%d: consistency check completed
.Pp
A user-initiated consistency check has started/completed.
.It mlx%d: drive rebuild started for %d:%d
.It mlx%d: drive rebuild completed
.Pp
A user-initiated physical drive rebuild has started/completed.
.It mlx%d: background check/rebuild operation started
.It mlx%d: background check/rebuild operation completed
.Pp
An automatic system drive consistency check
or physical drive rebuild has started/completed.
.It mlx%d: channel %d pausing for %d seconds
.It mlx%d: channel %d resuming
.It mlx%d: pause command failed - %s
.It mlx%d: pause failed for channel %d
.It mlx%d: resume command failed - %s
.It mlx%d: resume failed for channel %d
.Pp
Controller/channel pause operation notification.
(Channel pause is not currently supported on any controller.)
.It mlx%d: controller wedged (not taking commands)
.Pp
The controller is not responding to attempts to submit new commands.
.It mlx%d: duplicate done event for slot %d
.It mlx%d: done event for nonbusy slot %d
.Pp
Corruption has occurred in either the controller's onboard list of commands
or in the driver.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mlxcontrol 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Michael Smith Aq Mt msmith@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Jeroen Ruigrok van der Werven Aq Mt asmodai@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Michael Smith Aq Mt msmith@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The DEC KZPSC has insufficient flash ROM to hold any reasonably recent firmware.
This has caused problems for this driver.
.Pp
The driver does not yet support the version 6.x firmware as found in the
AcceleRAID 352 and eXtremeRAID 2000 and 3000 products.
