.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000-2003
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@windriver.com>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: /repoman/r/ncvs/src/share/man/man4/axe.4,v 1.3 2003/05/29 21:28:35 ru Exp $
.\" $OpenBSD: mos.4,v 1.12 2022/02/18 10:24:32 jsg Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 18 2022 $
.Dt MOS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mos
.Nd MosChip MCS7730/7830/7832 10/100 USB Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "mos*   at uhub?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB Ethernet adapters based on the MosChip
MCS7730, MCS7830 and MCS7832 USB 2.0 chipsets, including the
following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Delock 61147
.It Sitecom LN-030
.It Syba SY-U2LAN
.El
.Pp
All adapters operate with either USB 1.x or USB 2.0 controllers,
though performance with 1.x controllers is limited since
the USB 1.x standard specifies a maximum transfer speed of 12Mbps.
Users with USB 1.x controllers should therefore not expect to actually
achieve 100Mbps speeds with these devices.
.Pp
A 64-bit multicast hash table is supported,
single perfect filter entry for the station address,
all-multicast mode, and promiscuous mode.
Packets are
received and transmitted over separate USB bulk transfer endpoints.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width "autoselect"
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options (this is the default).
The user can manually override the autoselected mode by adding media
options to the appropriate
.Xr hostname.if 5
file.
.It 10baseT
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width "full-duplex"
.It full-duplex
Force full-duplex operation.
.It half-duplex
Force half-duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "mos0: watchdog timeout"
A packet was queued for transmission and a transmit command was
issued, however the device failed to acknowledge the transmission
before a timeout expired.
.It "mos0: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T "MosChip India"
.%U https://moschip.com
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Johann Christian Rode Aq Mt jcrode@gmx.net .
