.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997
.\" Kazutaka YOKOTA <yokota@zodiac.mech.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 3, 1997
.Dt MOUSE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mouse
.Nd mouse and pointing device drivers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/mouse.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The mouse drivers
.Xr psm 4 ,
.Xr ums 4
and
.Xr sysmouse 4
provide user programs with movement and button state information of the mouse.
Currently there are specific device drivers for bus, InPort, PS/2, and USB mice.
The serial mouse is not directly supported by a dedicated driver, but
it is accessible via the serial device driver or via
.Xr moused 8
and
.Xr sysmouse 4 .
.Pp
The user program simply opens a mouse device with a
.Xr open 2
call and reads
mouse data from the device via
.Xr read 2 .
Movement and button states are usually encoded in fixed-length data packets.
Some mouse devices may send data in variable length of packets.
Actual protocol (data format) used by each driver differs widely.
.Pp
The mouse drivers may have ``non-blocking'' attribute which will make
the driver return immediately if mouse data is not available.
.Pp
Mouse device drivers often offer several levels of operation.
The current operation level can be examined and changed via
.Xr ioctl 2
commands.
The level zero is the lowest level at which the driver offers the basic
service to user programs.
Most drivers provide horizontal and vertical movement of the mouse
and state of up to three buttons at this level.
At the level one, if supported by the driver, mouse data is encoded
in the standard format
.Dv MOUSE_PROTO_SYSMOUSE
as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Byte_1 -compact
.It Byte 1
.Bl -tag -width bit_7 -compact
.It bit 7
Always one.
.It bit 6..3
Always zero.
.It bit 2
Left button status; cleared if pressed, otherwise set.
.It bit 1
Middle button status; cleared if pressed, otherwise set.
Always one,
if the device does not have the middle button.
.It bit 0
Right button status; cleared if pressed, otherwise set.
.El
.It Byte 2
The first half of horizontal movement count in two's complement;
-128 through 127.
.It Byte 3
The first half of vertical movement count in two's complement;
-128 through 127.
.It Byte 4
The second half of the horizontal movement count in two's complement;
-128 through 127.
To obtain the full horizontal movement count, add
the byte 2 and 4.
.It Byte 5
The second half of the vertical movement count in two's complement;
-128 through 127.
To obtain the full vertical movement count, add
the byte 3 and 5.
.It Byte 6
The bit 7 is always zero.
The lower 7 bits encode the first half of
Z axis movement count in two's complement; -64 through 63.
.It Byte 7
The bit 7 is always zero.
The lower 7 bits encode the second half of
the Z axis movement count in two's complement; -64 through 63.
To obtain the full Z axis movement count, add the byte 6 and 7.
.It Byte 8
The bit 7 is always zero.
The bits 0 through 6 reflect the state
of the buttons 4 through 10.
If a button is pressed, the corresponding bit is cleared.
Otherwise
the bit is set.
.El
.Pp
The first 5 bytes of this format is compatible with the MouseSystems
format.
The additional 3 bytes have their MSBs always set to zero.
Thus, if the user program can interpret the MouseSystems data format and
tries to find the first byte of the format by detecting the bit pattern
10000xxxb,
it will discard the additional bytes, thus, be able to decode x, y
and states of 3 buttons correctly.
.Pp
Device drivers may offer operation levels higher than one.
Refer to manual pages of individual drivers for details.
.Sh IOCTLS
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
commands are defined for the mouse drivers.
The degree of support
varies from one driver to another.
This section gives general
description of the commands.
Refer to manual pages of individual drivers for specific details.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width MOUSE -compact
.It Dv MOUSE_GETLEVEL Ar int *level
.It Dv MOUSE_SETLEVEL Ar int *level
These commands manipulate the operation level of the mouse driver.
.Pp
.It Dv MOUSE_GETHWINFO Ar mousehw_t *hw
Returns the hardware information of the attached device in the following
Except for the
.Dv iftype
field, the device driver may not always fill the structure with correct
values.
Consult manual pages of individual drivers for details of support.
.Bd -literal
typedef struct mousehw {
    int buttons;    /* number of buttons */
    int iftype;     /* I/F type */
    int type;       /* mouse/track ball/pad... */
    int model;      /* I/F dependent model ID */
    int hwid;       /* I/F dependent hardware ID */
} mousehw_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Dv buttons
field holds the number of buttons detected by the driver.
The driver
may put an arbitrary value, such as two, in this field, if it cannot
determine the exact number.
.Pp
The
.Dv iftype
is the type of interface:
.Dv MOUSE_IF_SERIAL ,
.Dv MOUSE_IF_BUS ,
.Dv MOUSE_IF_INPORT ,
.Dv MOUSE_IF_PS2 ,
.Dv MOUSE_IF_USB ,
.Dv MOUSE_IF_SYSMOUSE
or
.Dv MOUSE_IF_UNKNOWN .
.Pp
The
.Dv type
tells the device type:
.Dv MOUSE_MOUSE ,
.Dv MOUSE_TRACKBALL ,
.Dv MOUSE_STICK ,
.Dv MOUSE_PAD ,
or
.Dv MOUSE_UNKNOWN .
.Pp
The
.Dv model
may be
.Dv MOUSE_MODEL_GENERIC
or one of
.Dv MOUSE_MODEL_XXX
constants.
.Pp
The
.Dv hwid
is the ID value returned by the pointing device.
It
depend on the interface type; refer to the manual page of
specific mouse drivers for possible values.
.Pp
.It Dv MOUSE_GETMODE Ar mousemode_t *mode
The command reports the current operation parameters of the mouse driver.
.Bd -literal
typedef struct mousemode {
    int protocol;    /* MOUSE_PROTO_XXX */
    int rate;        /* report rate (per sec) */
    int resolution;  /* MOUSE_RES_XXX, -1 if unknown */
    int accelfactor; /* acceleration factor */
    int level;       /* driver operation level */
    int packetsize;  /* the length of the data packet */
    unsigned char syncmask[2]; /* sync. bits */
} mousemode_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Dv protocol
field tells the format in which the device status is returned
when the mouse data is read by the user program.
It is one of
.Dv MOUSE_PROTO_XXX
constants.
.Pp
The
.Dv rate
field is the status report rate (reports/sec) at which the device will send
movement reports to the host computer.
-1 if unknown or not applicable.
.Pp
The
.Dv resolution
field holds a value specifying resolution of the pointing device.
It is a positive value or one of
.Dv MOUSE_RES_XXX
constants.
.Pp
The
.Dv accelfactor
field holds a value to control acceleration feature.
It must be zero or greater.
If it is zero, acceleration is disabled.
.Pp
The
.Dv packetsize
field tells the length of the fixed-size data packet or the length
of the fixed part of the variable-length packet.
The size depends on the interface type, the device type and model, the
protocol and the operation level of the driver.
.Pp
The array
.Dv syncmask
holds a bit mask and pattern to detect the first byte of the
data packet.
.Dv syncmask[0]
is the bit mask to be ANDed with a byte.
If the result is equal to
.Dv syncmask[1] ,
the byte is likely to be the first byte of the data packet.
Note that this method of detecting the first byte is not 100% reliable,
thus, should be taken only as an advisory measure.
.Pp
.It Dv MOUSE_SETMODE Ar mousemode_t *mode
The command changes the current operation parameters of the mouse driver
as specified in
.Ar mode .
Only
.Dv rate ,
.Dv resolution ,
.Dv level
and
.Dv accelfactor
may be modifiable.
Setting values in the other field does not generate
error and has no effect.
.Pp
If you do not want to change the current setting of a field, put -1
there.
You may also put zero in
.Dv resolution
and
.Dv rate ,
and the default value for the fields will be selected.
.Pp
.It Dv MOUSE_READDATA Ar mousedata_t *data
The command reads the raw data from the device.
.Bd -literal
typedef struct mousedata {
    int len;        /* # of data in the buffer */
    int buf[16];    /* data buffer */
} mousedata_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The calling process must fill the
.Dv len
field with the number of bytes to be read into the buffer.
This command may not be supported by all drivers.
.Pp
.It Dv MOUSE_READSTATE Ar mousedata_t *state
The command reads the raw state data from the device.
It uses the same structure as above.
This command may not be supported by all drivers.
.Pp
.It Dv MOUSE_GETSTATUS Ar mousestatus_t *status
The command returns the current state of buttons and
movement counts in the following structure.
.Bd -literal
typedef struct mousestatus {
    int flags;      /* state change flags */
    int button;     /* button status */
    int obutton;    /* previous button status */
    int dx;         /* x movement */
    int dy;         /* y movement */
    int dz;         /* z movement */
} mousestatus_t;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Dv button
and
.Dv obutton
fields hold the current and the previous state of the mouse buttons.
When a button is pressed, the corresponding bit is set.
The mouse drivers may support up to 31 buttons with the bit 0 through 31.
Few button bits are defined as
.Dv MOUSE_BUTTON1DOWN
through
.Dv MOUSE_BUTTON8DOWN .
The first three buttons correspond to left, middle and right buttons.
.Pp
If the state of the button has changed since the last
.Dv MOUSE_GETSTATUS
call, the corresponding bit in the
.Dv flags
field will be set.
If the mouse has moved since the last call, the
.Dv MOUSE_POSCHANGED
bit in the
.Dv flags
field will also be set.
.Pp
The other fields hold movement counts since the last
.Dv MOUSE_GETSTATUS
call.
The internal counters will be reset after every call to this
command.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/sysmouseXX -compact
.It Pa /dev/cuau%d
serial ports
.It Pa /dev/psm%d
PS/2 mouse device
.It Pa /dev/sysmouse
virtual mouse device
.It Pa /dev/ums%d
USB mouse device
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr psm 4 ,
.Xr sysmouse 4 ,
.Xr ums 4 ,
.Xr moused 8
.\".Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Kazutaka Yokota Aq Mt yokota@FreeBSD.org .
