.\"	$OpenBSD: mpe.4,v 1.12 2021/05/14 13:10:20 kn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008 Pierre-Yves Ritschard <pyr@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 14 2021 $
.Dt MPE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mpe
.Nd MPLS Provider Edge
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device mpe"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface is a Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Provider Edge
pseudo-device used to enter and leave an MPLS domain.
.Pp
An
.Nm
interface can be created at runtime using the
.Ic ifconfig mpe Ns Ar N Ic create
command or by setting up a
.Xr hostname.if 5
configuration file for
.Xr netstart 8 .
The interface itself can be configured with
.Xr ifconfig 8 ;
see its manual page for more information.
.Sh IOCTLS
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls are specific to
.Nm ,
.Xr mpip 4
and
.Xr mpw 4
interfaces:
.Bl -tag -width "SIOCSETLABEL" -offset 3n
.It SIOCSETLABEL
Encapsulate packets entering this interface in MPLS using
the specified label.
.It SIOCGETLABEL
Report the label that packets entering this interface will be
tagged with.
.It SIOCDELLABEL
Unset the MPLS label.
.El
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysctl 2 ,
.Xr mpip 4 ,
.Xr mpw 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr ldpd 8 ,
.Xr netstart 8
.\"
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device first appeared in
.Ox 4.4 .
.\"
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Pierre-Yves Ritschard Aq Mt pyr@openbsd.org .
