.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Spectra Logic Corporation
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 LSI Corp
.\" Copyright (c) 2015-2017 Avago Technologies
.\" Copyright (c) 2015-2017 Broadcom Ltd.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce at minimum a disclaimer
.\"    substantially similar to the "NO WARRANTY" disclaimer below
.\"    ("Disclaimer") and any redistribution must be conditioned upon
.\"    including a substantially similar Disclaimer requirement for further
.\"    binary redistribution.
.\"
.\" NO WARRANTY
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\"
.\" mpr driver man page.
.\"
.\" Author: Ken Merry <ken@FreeBSD.org>
.\" Author: Stephen McConnell <slm@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 25, 2017
.Dt MPR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mpr
.Nd "LSI Fusion-MPT 3/3.5 IT/IR 12Gb/s Serial Attached SCSI/SATA/PCIe driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place these lines in the kernel
configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device mpr"
.Ed
.Pp
The driver can be loaded as a module at boot time by placing this line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mpr_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI)
Fusion-MPT 3/3.5 IT/IR
.Tn SAS/PCIe
controllers.
.Sh HARDWARE
These controllers are supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3004 (4 Port SAS)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3008 (8 Port SAS)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3108 (8 Port SAS)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3216 (16 Port SAS)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3224 (24 Port SAS)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3316 (16 Port SAS)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3324 (24 Port SAS)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3408 (8 Port SAS/PCIe)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3416 (16 Port SAS/PCIe)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3508 (8 Port SAS/PCIe)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3516 (16 Port SAS/PCIe)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3616 (16 Port SAS/PCIe)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3708 (8 Port SAS/PCIe)
.It
Broadcom Ltd./Avago Tech (LSI) SAS 3716 (16 Port SAS/PCIe)
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
In all tunable descriptions below, X represents the adapter number.
.Pp
To disable MSI interrupts for all
.Nm
driver instances, set this tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.disable_msi=1
.Ed
.Pp
To disable MSI interrupts for a specific
.Nm
driver instance, set this tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.disable_msi=1
.Ed
.Pp
To disable MSI-X interrupts for all
.Nm
driver instances, set this tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.disable_msix=1
.Ed
.Pp
To disable MSI-X interrupts for a specific
.Nm
driver instance, set this tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.disable_msix=1
.Ed
.Pp
To set the maximum number of DMA chains allocated for all adapters, set
this tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.max_chains=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
To set the maximum number of DMA chains allocated for a specific adapter,
set this tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.max_chains=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
The default max_chains value is 2048.
.Pp
The current number of free chain frames is stored in the
dev.mpr.X.chain_free
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
The lowest number of free chain frames seen since boot is stored in the
dev.mpr.X.chain_free_lowwater
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
The number of times that chain frame allocations have failed since boot is
stored in the
dev.mpr.X.chain_alloc_fail
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
This can be used to determine whether the max_chains tunable should be
increased to help performance.
.Pp
The current number of active I/O commands is shown in the
dev.mpr.X.io_cmds_active
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
The current number of free PRP pages is stored in the
dev.mpr.X.prp_pages_free
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
PRP pages are used by NVMe devices for I/O transfers, much like Scatter/Gather
lists.
.Pp
The lowest number of free PRP pages seen since boot is stored in the
dev.mpr.X.prp_pages_free_lowwater
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
The number of times that PRP page allocations have failed since boot is
stored in the
dev.mpr.X.prp_page_alloc_fail
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
To set the maximum number of pages that will be used per I/O for all adapters,
set this tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.max_io_pages=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
To set the maximum number of pages that will be used per I/O for a specific
adapter, set this tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.max_io_pages=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
The default max_io_pages value is -1, meaning that the maximum I/O size that
will be used per I/O will be calculated using the IOCFacts values stored in
the controller.
The lowest value that the driver will use for max_io_pages is 1, otherwise
IOCFacts will be used to calculate the maximum I/O size.
The smaller I/O size calculated from either max_io_pages or IOCFacts will be the
maximum I/O size used by the driver.
.Pp
The highest number of active I/O commands seen since boot is stored in the
dev.mpr.X.io_cmds_highwater
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
Devices can be excluded from
.Nm
control for all adapters by setting this tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.exclude_ids=Y
.Ed
.Pp
Y represents the target ID of the device.
If more than one device is to be excluded, target IDs are separated by commas.
.Pp
Devices can be excluded from
.Nm
control for a specific adapter by setting this tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.exclude_ids=Y
.Ed
.Pp
Y represents the target ID of the device.
If more than one device is to be excluded, target IDs are separated by commas.
.Pp
The adapter can issue the
.Sy StartStopUnit
SCSI command to SATA direct-access devices during shutdown.
This allows the device to quiesce powering down.
To control this feature for all adapters, set the
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.enable_ssu
.Ed
.Pp
tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5
to one of these values:
.Bl -tag -width 6n -offset indent
.It 0
Do not send SSU to either HDDs or SSDs.
.It 1
Send SSU to SSDs, but not to HDDs.
This is the default value.
.It 2
Send SSU to HDDs, but not to SSDs.
.It 3
Send SSU to both HDDs and SSDs.
.El
.Pp
To control this feature for a specific adapter, set this tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.enable_ssu
.Ed
.Pp
The same set of values are valid as when setting this tunable for all adapters.
.Pp
SATA disks that take several seconds to spin up and fail the SATA Identify
command might not be discovered by the driver.
This problem can sometimes be overcome by increasing the value of the spinup
wait time in
.Xr loader.conf 5
with the
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.spinup_wait_time=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
tunable.
NNNN represents the number of seconds to wait for SATA devices to spin up when
the device fails the initial SATA Identify command.
.Pp
Spinup wait times can be set for specific adapters in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
with the
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.spinup_wait_time=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
tunable.
NNNN is the number of seconds to wait for SATA devices to spin up when they fail
the initial SATA Identify command.
.Pp
The driver can map devices discovered by the adapter so that target IDs
corresponding to a specific device persist across resets and reboots.
In some cases it is possible for devices to lose their mapped IDs due to
unexpected behavior from certain hardware, such as some types of enclosures.
To overcome this problem, a tunable is provided that will force the driver to
map devices using the Phy number associated with the device.
This feature is not recommended if the topology includes multiple
enclosures/expanders.
If multiple enclosures/expanders are present in the topology, Phy numbers are
repeated, causing all devices at these Phy numbers except the first device to
fail enumeration.
To control this feature for all adapters, set the
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.use_phy_num
.Ed
.Pp
tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5
to one of these values:
.Bl -tag -width 6n -offset indent
.It -1
Only use Phy numbers to map devices and bypass the driver's mapping logic.
.It 0
Never use Phy numbers to map devices.
.It 1
Use Phy numbers to map devices, but only if the driver's mapping logic fails
to map the device that is being enumerated.
This is the default value.
.El
.Pp
To control this feature for a specific adapter, set this tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.use_phy_num
.Ed
.Pp
The same set of values are valid as when setting this tunable for all adapters.
.Pp
.Sh DEBUGGING
Driver diagnostic printing is controlled in
.Xr loader.conf 5
by using the global
.Va hw.mpr.debug_level
and per-device
.Va dev.mpr.X.debug_level
tunables.
One can alter the debug level for any adapter at run-time using the
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
.Va dev.mpr.X.debug_level .
.Pp
All
.Va debug_level
variables can be named by either an integer value or a text string.
Multiple values can be specified together by either ORing the
integer values or by providing a comma-separated list of names.
A text string prefixed by
.Qq +
adds the specified debug levels to the existing set, while the prefix
.Qq -
removes them from the existing set.
The current
.Va debug_level
status is reported in both formats for convenience.
The following levels are available:
.Bl -column "FlagXX" "NameXXXX" "Description" -offset indent
.It Em Flag Ta Em Name Ta Em Description
.It 0x0001 Ta info Ta Basic information (enabled by default)
.It 0x0002 Ta fault Ta Driver faults (enabled by default)
.It 0x0004 Ta event Ta Controller events
.It 0x0008 Ta log Ta Logging data from controller
.It 0x0010 Ta recovery Ta Tracing of recovery operations
.It 0x0020 Ta error Ta Parameter errors and programming bugs
.It 0x0040 Ta init Ta System initialization operations
.It 0x0080 Ta xinfo Ta More detailed information
.It 0x0100 Ta user Ta Tracing of user-generated commands (IOCTL)
.It 0x0200 Ta mapping Ta Tracing of device mapping
.It 0x0400 Ta trace Ta Tracing through driver functions
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr mps 4 ,
.Xr mpt 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr targ 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 9.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was originally written by
.An -nosplit
.An Scott Long Aq Mt scottl@FreeBSD.org .
It has been improved and tested by LSI Corporation,
Avago Technologies (formally LSI), and Broadcom Ltd. (formally Avago).
.Pp
This man page was written by
.An Ken Merry Aq Mt ken@FreeBSD.org
with additional input from
.An Stephen McConnell Aq Mt slm@FreeBSD.org .
