.\"	$NetBSD: mpt.4,v 1.1 2003/04/16 22:32:15 thorpej Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Wasabi Systems, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Written by Jason R. Thorpe for Wasabi Systems, Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed for the NetBSD Project by
.\"	Wasabi Systems, Inc.
.\" 4. The name of Wasabi Systems, Inc. may not be used to endorse
.\"    or promote products derived from this software without specific prior
.\"    written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY WASABI SYSTEMS, INC. ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL WASABI SYSTEMS, INC
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 23, 2011
.Dt MPT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mpt
.Nd LSI Fusion-MPT SCSI/Fibre Channel driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device mpt"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mpt_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support
for the LSI Logic Fusion-MPT family of
.Tn SCSI ,
.Tn Fibre Channel
and
.Tn SAS
controllers.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following controllers are supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
LSI Logic 53c1030,
LSI Logic LSI2x320-X
(Single and Dual Ultra320
.Tn SCSI )
.It
LSI Logic AS1064,
LSI Logic AS1068
.Pq Tn SAS/SATA
.It
LSI Logic FC909
(1Gb/s
.Tn Fibre Channel )
.It
LSI Logic FC909A
(Dual 1Gb/s
.Tn Fibre Channel )
.It
LSI Logic FC919,
LSI Logic 7102XP-LC
(Single 2Gb/s
.Tn Fibre Channel )
.It
LSI Logic FC929,
LSI Logic FC929X,
LSI Logic 7202XP-LC
(Dual 2Gb/s
.Tn Fibre Channel )
.It
LSI Logic FC949X
(Dual 4Gb/s
.Tn Fibre Channel )
.It
LSI Logic FC949E,
LSI Logic FC949ES
(Dual 4Gb/s
.Tn Fibre Channel PCI-Express)
.El
.Pp
The
.Tn Ultra 320 SCSI
controller chips supported by the
.Nm
driver can be found onboard on many systems including:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Dell PowerEdge 1750 thru 2850
.It
IBM eServer xSeries 335
.El
.Pp
These systems also contain Integrated RAID Mirroring and Integrated
RAID Mirroring Enhanced which this driver also supports.
.Pp
The
.Tn SAS
controller chips are also present on many new AMD/Opteron based systems,
like the Sun 4100.
Note that this controller can drive both SAS and SATA
drives or a mix of them at the same time.
The Integrated RAID Mirroring
available for these controllers is poorly supported at best.
.Pp
The
.Tn Fibre Channel
controller chipset are supported by a broad variety of speeds and systems.
The
.Tn Apple
Fibre Channel HBA is in fact the
.Tn FC949ES
card.
.Pp
This driver also supports target mode for Fibre Channel cards.
This support may be enabled by setting the desired role of the core via
the LSI Logic firmware utility that establishes what roles the card
can take on - no separate compilation is required.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr mps 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr targ 4 ,
.Xr gmultipath 8 ,
.Xr mptutil 8
.Rs
.%T "LSI Logic Website"
.%U http://www.lsi.com/
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written for
.Fx
by
.An Greg Ansley
and marginally improved upon
by
.An Matt Jacob Aq Mt mjacob@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
.An Justin Gibbs Aq Mt gibbs@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Scott Long Aq Mt scottl@FreeBSD.org
have made more substantial improvements.
