.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 23, 2015
.Dt MVS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mvs
.Nd Marvell Serial ATA Host Controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device mvs"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mvs_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
The following tunables are settable from the
.Xr loader 8 :
.Bl -ohang
.It Va hint.mvs. Ns Ar X Ns Va .msi
controls Message Signaled Interrupts (MSI) usage by the specified controller.
.It Va hint.mvs. Ns Ar X Ns Va .ccc
controls Command Completion Coalescing (CCC) usage by the specified controller.
Non-zero value enables CCC and defines maximum time (in us), request can wait
for interrupt.
CCC reduces number of context switches on systems with many parallel requests,
but it can decrease disk performance on some workloads due to additional
command latency.
.It Va hint.mvs. Ns Ar X Ns Va .cccc
defines number of completed commands for CCC, which trigger interrupt without
waiting for specified coalescing timeout.
.It Va hint.mvsch. Ns Ar X Ns Va .pm_level
controls SATA interface Power Management for the specified channel,
allowing some power to be saved at the cost of additional command
latency.
Possible values:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 4n -offset indent -compact
.It 0
interface Power Management is disabled (default);
.It 1
device is allowed to initiate PM state change, host is passive;
.It 4
driver initiates PARTIAL PM state transition 1ms after port becomes idle;
.It 5
driver initiates SLUMBER PM state transition 125ms after port becomes idle.
.El
.Pp
Note that interface Power Management is not compatible with
device presence detection.
A manual bus reset is needed on device hot-plug.
.It Va hint.mvsch. Ns Ar X Ns Va .sata_rev
setting to nonzero value limits maximum SATA revision (speed).
Values 1, 2 and 3 are respectively 1.5, 3 and 6Gbps.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides the
.Xr CAM 4
subsystem with native access to the
.Tn SATA
ports of several generations (Gen-I/II/IIe) of Marvell SATA controllers.
Each SATA port found is represented to CAM as a separate bus with one
target, or, if HBA supports Port Multipliers (Gen-II/IIe), 16 targets.
Most of the bus-management details are handled by the SATA-specific
transport of CAM.
Connected ATA disks are handled by the ATA protocol disk peripheral driver
.Xr ada 4 .
ATAPI devices are handled by the SCSI protocol peripheral drivers
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
etc.
.Pp
Driver features include support for Serial ATA and ATAPI devices,
Port Multipliers (including FIS-based switching, when supported),
hardware command queues (up to 31 command per port),
Native Command Queuing, SATA interface Power Management, device hot-plug
and Message Signaled Interrupts.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following controllers:
.Pp
Gen-I (SATA 1.5Gbps):
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset "xxxxxx"
.It
88SX5040
.It
88SX5041
.It
88SX5080
.It
88SX5081
.El
.Pp
Gen-II (SATA 3Gbps, NCQ, PMP):
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset "xxxxxx"
.It
88SX6040
.It
88SX6041 (including Adaptec 1420SA)
.It
88SX6080
.It
88SX6081
.El
.Pp
Gen-IIe (SATA 3Gbps, NCQ, PMP with FBS):
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset "xxxxxx"
.It
88SX6042
.It
88SX7042 (including Adaptec 1430SA)
.It
88F5182 SoC
.It
88F6281 SoC
.It
MV78100 SoC
.El
.Pp
Note, that this hardware supports command queueing and FIS-based switching
only for ATA DMA commands.
ATAPI and non-DMA ATA commands executed one by one for each port.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ada 4 ,
.Xr ata 4 ,
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Alexander Motin Aq Mt mav@FreeBSD.org
