.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\" All rights reserved.
.\""
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce at minimum a disclaimer
.\"    similar to the "NO WARRANTY" disclaimer below ("Disclaimer") and any
.\"    redistribution must be conditioned upon including a substantially
.\"    similar Disclaimer requirement for further binary redistribution.
.\"
.\" NO WARRANTY
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF NONINFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTIBILITY
.\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"/
.Dd July 8, 2009
.Dt MWL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mwl
.Nd "Marvell 88W8363 IEEE 802.11n wireless network driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device mwl"
.Cd "device mwlfw"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Cd "device firmware"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_mwl_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for IEEE 802.11n wireless network adapters based on
Marvell 88W8363 parts.
PCI and/or CardBus interfaces are supported.
.Pp
This driver requires the firmware built with the
.Nm mwlfw
module to work.
Normally this module is loaded on demand by the driver but it may
also be compiled into the kernel.
.Pp
Supported features include 802.11n, power management, BSS, MBSS,
and host-based access point operation modes.
All host/device interaction is via DMA.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver encapsulates IP and ARP traffic as 802.11 frames, however
it can receive either 802.11 or 802.3 frames.
Devices support 802.11n, 802.11a, 802.11g, and 802.11b operation with
transmit speeds appropriate to each.
The actual transmit speed used is dependent on signal quality and the
.Dq "rate control"
algorithm implemented in the firmware.
All chips have hardware support for WEP,
AES-CCM, TKIP, and Michael cryptographic operations.
.Pp
The driver supports
.Cm station ,
.Cm hostap ,
.Cm mesh ,
and
.Cm wds
mode operation.
Multiple
.Cm hostap
virtual interfaces may be configured for simultaneous use.
When multiple interfaces are configured each may have a separate
mac address that is formed by setting the U/L bits in the mac
address assigned to the underlying device.
Any number of
.Cm wds
virtual interfaces may be configured together with
.Cm hostap
interfaces.
Multiple
.Cm station
interfaces may be operated together with
.Cm hostap
interfaces to construct a wireless repeater device.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
Devices supported by the
.Nm
driver come in either Cardbus or mini-PCI packages.
Wireless cards in Cardbus slots may be inserted and ejected on the fly.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (ie: connect to an access point):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev mwl0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
	netmask 0xffffff00"
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev mwl0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
	netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net"
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev mwl0
ifconfig wlan0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
	wepmode on wepkey 0x8736639624
.Ed
.Pp
Create an 802.11g host-based access point:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev mwl0 wlanmode hostap
ifconfig wlan0 inet 192.168.0.10 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_ap \e
	mode 11g
.Ed
.Pp
Create an 802.11a mesh station:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev mwl0 wlanmode mesh
ifconfig wlan0 meshid my_mesh mode 11a inet 192.168.0.10/24
.Ed
.Pp
Create two virtual 802.11a host-based access points, one
with WEP enabled and one with no security, and bridge them to
the fxp0 (wired) device:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev mwl0 wlanmode hostap \e
	ssid paying-customers wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 \e
	mode 11a up
ifconfig wlan1 create wlandev mwl0 wlanmode hostap bssid \e
	ssid freeloaders up
ifconfig bridge0 create addm wlan0 addm wlan1 addm fxp0 up
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "mwl%d: unable to setup builtin firmware"
There was a problem downloading and/or setting up the firmware.
The device is not usable.
.It "mwl%d: failed to setup descriptors: %d"
There was a problem setting up the DMA data structures.
This typically is caused by not being able to allocate contiguous memory.
.It "mwl%d: transmit timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
This should not happen.
.It "mwl%d: device not present"
A cardbus device was ejected while active; the request to the firmware
was not completed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cardbus 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr mwlfw 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr wlan_ccmp 4 ,
.Xr wlan_tkip 4 ,
.Xr wlan_wep 4 ,
.Xr wlan_xauth 4 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.0 .
.Sh BUGS
The driver does not support power-save operation in station mode;
consequently power use is suboptimal (e.g. on a laptop).
