.\" $OpenBSD: neo.4,v 1.14 2023/09/11 05:07:34 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Constantine Paul Sapuntzakis
.\" All rights reserved
.\"
.\" Author: Constantine Paul Sapuntzakis (csapuntz@cvs.openbsd.org)
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The author's name or those of the contributors may not be used to
.\"    endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\"    specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR(S) AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 11 2023 $
.Dt NEO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm neo
.Nd NeoMagic 256AV/ZX audio device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "neo* at pci?"
.Cd "audio* at neo?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for NeoMagic MagicMedia 256AV and 256ZX
audio chips found in many laptops, and perhaps on some PCI cards.
.Sh FILES
The driver needs a firmware file,
which is loaded on demand when the device is attached:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/neo-coefficients
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ac97 4 ,
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Ox 2.7 .
.Sh BUGS
This driver has some bugs because NeoMagic refuses to provide documentation,
even though they are discontinuing their products.
At the time of contact, all persons working at the company were hiding
behind their receptionist as if in a stage of siege.
