.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\" All rights reserved.
.\""
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce at minimum a disclaimer
.\"    similar to the "NO WARRANTY" disclaimer below ("Disclaimer") and any
.\"    redistribution must be conditioned upon including a substantially
.\"    similar Disclaimer requirement for further binary redistribution.
.\"
.\" NO WARRANTY
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF NONINFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTIBILITY
.\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 10, 2009
.Dt NET80211 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm net80211
.Nd standard interface to IEEE 802.11 devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/socket.h
.In net/if.h
.In net/ethernet.h
.In net80211/ieee80211_ioctl.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This section describes the standard programming
interface to configure and retrieve status information
for IEEE 802.11 devices that depend on the
.Xr wlan 4
module for operation.
The interface is via one
of the following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls on a socket:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv SIOCG80211"
.It Dv SIOCG80211
Get configuration or status information.
.It Dv SIOCS80211
Set configuration information.
.El
.Pp
These requests are made via a modified
.Vt ifreq
structure.
This structure is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal
struct ieee80211req {
	char		i_name[IFNAMSIZ];	/* if_name, e.g. "wi0" */
	uint16_t	i_type;			/* req type */
	int16_t		i_val;			/* Index or simple value */
	int16_t		i_len;			/* Index or simple value */
	void		*i_data;		/* Extra data */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Requests that are not supported by the underlying device return
-1 and set the global variable errno to
.Er EOPNOTSUPP .
.Dv SIOCG80211
requests that return data to an application place small values in
.Va i_val
or in a user-specified buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
When an indirect buffer is used
.Va i_len
specifies how large the indirect buffer is and on return it is set by the
system to the actual amount of data returned.
.Dv SIOCS80211
requests use a similar scheme with data passed to the system taken either
from
.Va i_val
or an indirect buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.Pp
For
.Dv SIOCG80211
the following values of
.Va i_type
are valid:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU
Return whether or not AMPDU is enabled in
.Va i_val .
AMPDU is an aggregation scheme that is part of the 802.11n specification
and is used only when operating on an HT channel.
The value returned is one of:
0 (AMPDU disabled),
1 (AMPDU enabled for transmit),
2 (AMPDU enabled for receive),
and
3 (AMPDU enabled for transmit and receive).
The 802.11n specification says a compliant station must receive AMPDU but
may not support transmitting AMPDU frames.
Disabling AMPDU receive is mainly useful for testing and working around bugs.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU_DENSITY
Return the minimum density for bursting AMPDU frames in
.Va i_val .
The value returned is one of:
0 (no time restriction),
1 (1/4 usec),
2 (1/2 usec),
3 (1 usec),
4 (2 usec),
5 (4 usec),
6 (8 usec),
and
7 (16 usec).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU_LIMIT
Return the limit on the size of AMPDU frames in
.Va i_val .
The value returned is one of:
0 (8 kilobytes),
1 (16 kilobytes),
2 (32 kilobytes),
and
3 (64 kilobytes).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMSDU
Return whether or not AMSDU is enabled in
.Va i_val .
AMSDU is an aggregation scheme that is part of the 802.11n specification
and is used only when operating on an HT channel.
The value returned is one of:
0 (AMSDU disabled),
1 (AMSDU enabled for transmit),
2 (AMSDU enabled for receive),
and
3 (AMSDU enabled for transmit and receive).
The 802.11n specification says a compliant station must receive AMSDU but
may not support transmitting AMSDU frames.
Disabling AMSDU receive is mainly useful for testing and working around bugs.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMSDU_LIMIT
Return the limit on the size of AMSDU frames in
.Va i_val .
The value returned is one of:
3839 (bytes)
and
7935 (bytes).
Note these values are specified by 802.11n; arbitrary values are not allowed.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_APBRIDGE
Return whether AP bridging is enabled in
.Va i_val .
Normally packets sent between stations associated
to the same access point are delivered without going through system layers
that do packet filtering; when AP bridging is disabled packets are
passed up the system to be forwarded using some other mechanism.
This value will be non-zero when AP bridging is enabled and otherwise zero.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_APPIE
Return an application information element via
.Va i_data .
Application IE's are maintained for many 802.11 frames; the
request must identify the frame to return an IE for in
.Va i_val .
For example, to retrieve the IE sent in each Beacon frame
.Va i_val
would be set to
.Va IEEE80211_FC0_SUBTYPE_BEACON | IEEE80211_FC0_TYPE_MGT .
If no information element is installed then
.Er EINVAL
is returned.
If the data buffer for returning data is too small to hold the information
element the value is truncated; this permits querying the presence of
data by requesting zero bytes of data be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AUTHMODE
Return the current authentication mode in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are
.Dv IEEE80211_AUTH_NONE
(no authentication),
.Dv IEEE80211_AUTH_OPEN
(open authentication),
.Dv IEEE80211_AUTH_SHARED
(shared key authentication),
.Dv IEEE80211_AUTH_8021X
(802.1x only authentication),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_AUTH_WPA
(WPA/802.11i/802.1x authentication).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BEACON_INTERVAL
Return the time between Beacon frames (in TU) in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN
Return whether background scanning is enabled in
.Va i_val .
When this value is non-zero and operating in station mode
the station will periodically leave
the current channel and scan for neighboring stations.
See also
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_IDLE
and
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_INTERVAL .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_IDLE
Return in
.Va i_val
the minimum time (msecs) a station must be idle
(i.e. not transmitting or receiving frames)
before it will do a background scan.
See also
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_INTERVAL .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_INTERVAL
Return in
.Va i_val
the minimum time (seconds) between background scan operations.
See also
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_IDLE .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BMISSTHRESHOLD
Return in
.Va i_val
the number of consecutive missed Beacon frames before the system will
attempt to roam to a different/better access point.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BSSID
Return the MAC address for the current BSS identifier via
.Va i_data .
When the interface is running, the bssid is either the value
configured locally (e.g. for an IBSS network started by the local station)
or the value adopted when joining an existing network.
For WDS interfaces this value is the address of the remote station.
When the interface is not running, the bssid returned is the desired
bssid, if any, that has been configured.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BURST
Return whether or not packet bursting is enabled in
.Va i_val .
If this value is non-zero then the system will try to send packets closely
spaced to improve throughput.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CHANINFO
Return the set of available channels via
.Va i_data .
Note this data should be used by user applications to map between
channel specifications (frequency and attributes) and IEEE channel numbers
as user applications may not have the necessary information to do
this directly (e.g. for 900MHz radios, operation in the Public Safety Band).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CHANLIST
Return the current list of usable channels via
.Va i_data .
The channel list is returned as a bit vector with bit N set to 1 if
IEEE channel number N is available for use.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CHANNEL
Return the IEEE channel number of the current channel in
.Va i_val .
Note this request is deprecated; use
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CURCHAN
instead.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_COUNTERMEASURES
Return whether TKIP Countermeasures are enabled in
.Va i_val .
This value will be non-zero when Countermeasures are enabled and
otherwise zero.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CURCHAN
Return information for the current channel via
.Va i_data .
This information includes the IEEE channel number, the frequency, and
attributes that describe the operating constraints (e.g. Passive Scan,
DFS, usage restrictions).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DEVCAPS
Return device capabilities in the data buffer pointed at by
.Va i_data .
The buffer must be large enough to return the number of available
channels but otherwise may be made small to limit how much information
is returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DFS
Return whether or not Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS) is enabled in
.Va i_val .
DFS embodies several facilities including detection of overlapping
radar signals, dynamic transmit power control, and channel selection
according to a least-congested criteria.
DFS support is mandatory for some 5GHz frequencies in certain
locales (e.g. ETSI).
By default DFS is enabled according to the regulatory definitions
and the current country code, regdomain, and channel.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DOTD
Return whether or not 802.11d support is enabled in
.Va i_val .
When 802.11d is enabled in station mode, Beacon frames that advertise
a country code different than the currently configured country code will
cause an event to be dispatched to user applications.
This event can be used by the station to adopt that country code and
operate according to the associated regulatory constraints.
When operating as an access point with 802.11d enabled the Beacon and
ProbeResponse frames transmitted will advertise the current regulatory
domain settings.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DOTH
Return whether 802.11h support is enabled in
.Va i_val .
When 802.11h is enabled Beacon and ProbeResponse frames will have
the SpectrumMgt bit set in the capabilities field and
country and power constraint information elements will be present.
802.11h support also includes handling Channel Switch Announcements (CSA)
which are a mechanism to coordinate channel changes by an access point.
By default 802.11h is enabled if the device is capable.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DROPUNENCRYPTED
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
whether unencrypted packets transmit/received should be discarded.
This value will be zero if unencrypted packets will be accepted and
non-zero if they are to be discarded.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DTIM_PERIOD
Return the period (in beacon intervals) between DTIM events in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DWDS
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
whether or not Dynamic WDS support is enabled.
Dynamic WDS is a facility by which packets may be tunneled over normal
Infrastructure BSS associations using 4-address (WDS) frames.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_FF
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
whether Atheros fast-frames support is enabled.
Fast-frames is a non-standard protocol extension that aggregates multiple
frames to improve throughput.
Note that enabling fast-frames support does not guarantee use;
the client and access point must negotiate its use.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_FRAGTHRESHOLD
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
the threshold (in bytes) for enabling fragmentation frames.
Packets larger than this value will automatically be split into multiple
fragmented frames that are sent one after the other.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_GREENFIELD
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
whether or not Greenfield preamble use is enabled.
This  setting is meaningful only when operating with 802.11n on an HT channel.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HIDESSID
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
whether SSID hiding/cloaking is enabled.
SSID hiding is only meaningful when operating as an access point.
When this is enabled Beacon frames do not include the SSID and
ProbeRequest frames are not answered unless they include the AP's SSID.
This value will be non-zero when SSID hiding is enabled and otherwise zero.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTCOMPAT
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
whether or not 802.11n compatibility support is enabled.
The 802.11n protocol specification went through several incompatible iterations.
Some vendors implemented 11n support to older specifications that
will not interoperate with a purely 11n-compliant station.
In particular the information elements included in management frames
for old devices are different.
When compatibility support is enabled both standard and compatible data
will be provided and/or accepted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTCONF
Return the setting for automatic promotion of HT channels in
.Va i_val .
Promotion happens when the system must select a channel and may choose
between legacy, HT20, and HT40 operation (e.g. when scanning).
Valid values are:
0 (do not promote, use legacy),
1 (promote to HT20),
and
2 (promote to HT40).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTPROTMODE
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
the technique used to protect HT frames in a mixed 802.11n network.
Valid values are:
.Dv IEEE80211_PROTMODE_OFF
(no protection enabled)
and
.Dv IEEE80211_PROTMODE_RTSCTS
(send RTS and wait for CTS).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HWMP_MAXHOPS
Return the maximum acceptable hop count in an HWMP path in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HWMP_ROOTMODE
Return the setting for Mesh root mode operation in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are:
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_DISABLED
(root mode is disabled),
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_NORMAL
(send broadcast Path Request frames),
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_PROACTIVE
(send broadcast Path Request frames and force replies)
and
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_RANN
(send broadcast Root Announcement (RANN) frames).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_INACTIVITY
Return whether or not the system handles inactivity processing in
.Va i_val .
When inactivity processing is enabled the system will track stations
that have not transmitted frames and periodically probe them to
check if they are still present.
Stations that are inactive and do not respond to probes are dropped.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MACCMD
Return information about the state of the MAC address
access control list (ACL) system.
There are two requests supported:
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_POLICY
(to retrieve the current policy in
.Va i_val ),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_LIST
to retrieve the list installed/active ACL's via
.Va i_data .
The
.Xr wlan_acl 4
module must be installed and enabled or
.Er EINVAL
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_AP
Return whether or not Mesh AP support is enabled in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_ID
Return the Mesh ID in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_FWRD
Return whether or not packet forwarding support is enabled in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_PP_METRIC
Return the link metric protocol in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_PP_PATH
Return the path selection protocol in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_RTCMD
Return information about the state of the Mesh routing tables.
One request is supported:
.Dv IEEE80211_MESH_RTCMD_LIST
to retrieve the contents of the routing table in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_TTL
Return, in
.Va i_val ,
the Mesh Time To Live (TTL) setting installed in packets
transmitted by this mesh node.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_NUMSSIDS
Return the number of SSIDs supported in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_NUMWEPKEYS
Return the number of WEP keys supported in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVE
Return the current powersaving mode in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_OFF
(power save operation is disabled)
and
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_ON
(power save operation is enabled).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVESLEEP
Return the powersave sleep time in TU in
.Va i_val .
This value is also termed the listen interval and represents the maximum time
a station will sleep before waking to retrieve packets buffered by
an access point.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PRIVACY
Return the current MLME setting for PRIVACY in
.Va i_val .
When PRIVACY is enabled all data packets must be encrypted.
This value will be zero if PRIVACY is disabled and
non-zero when PRIVACY is enabled.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PROTMODE
Return the current 802.11g protection mode in
.Va i_val .
Protection is the mechanism used to safeguard 802.11b stations operating
on an 802.11g network.
Valid values are
.Dv IEEE80211_PROTMODE_OFF
(no protection enabled),
.Dv IEEE80211_PROTMODE_CTS
(send CTS to yourself),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_PROTMODE_RTSCTS
(send RTS and wait for CTS).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PUREG
Return whether ``pure 11g'' mode is enabled in
.Va i_val .
This setting is meaningful only for access point operation;
when non-zero, 802.11b stations will not be allowed to associate.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PUREN
Return whether ``pure 11n'' mode is enabled in
.Va i_val .
This setting is meaningful only for access point operation;
when non-zero, legacy (non-11n capable) stations will not be
allowed to associate.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_REGDOMAIN
Return the regulatory state in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_RIFS
Return whether or not Reduced InterFrame Spacing (RIFS) is enabled in
.Va i_val .
This  setting is meaningful only when operating with 802.11n on an HT channel.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_ROAM
Return station roaming parameters in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_ROAMING
Return the current roaming mode in
.Va i_val .
Roaming mode specifies which entity controls operation of the MLME
state machine when operating as a station in an Infrastructure BSS.
Valid values are:
.Dv IEEE80211_ROAMING_DEVICE
(driver/firmware is in control),
.Dv IEEE80211_ROAMING_AUTO
(host 802.11 layer is in control),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_ROAMING_MANUAL
(application is in control).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_RTSTHRESHOLD
Return the threshold (in bytes) for enabling transmission of RTS frames in
.Va i_val .
Packets larger than this value will automatically have an RTS frame
sent preceding it to reduce the likelihood of packet loss.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SCAN_RESULTS
Return the current contents of the scan cache in the data area pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SCANVALID
Return in
.Va i_val
how long (in seconds) results from a scan operation will be considered valid.
When scan results are no longer valid and they are needed (e.g. to roam) the
system will initiate a scan operation to replenish the scan cache.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SHORTGI
Return whether or not Short Guard Interval (SGI) is enabled in
.Va i_val .
Note SGI is only used when operating with 802.11n on an HT channel.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SMPS
Return the Spatial Multiplexing Power Save (SMPS) setting in
.Va i_val .
This setting is meaningful only when operating with 802.11n on an HT channel.
Valid values are:
.Dv IEEE80211_HTCAP_SMPS_DYNAMIC
(Dynamic SMPS is enabled),
.Dv IEEE80211_HTCAP_SMPS_ENA
(Static SMPS is enabled),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_HTCAP_SMPS_OFF
(SMPS is disabled).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SSID
Return the requested SSID in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
If
.Va i_val
is \(>= 0 then the request refers to the configured value for that slot.
Generally, 0 is the only valid value, but some interfaces support more
SSIDs.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STA_INFO
Return information about the current state of the specified station(s) via
.Va i_data .
The MAC address of a single station may be passed in or, if the broadcast
address is supplied, information about all stations will be returned.
If a single station is requested and the MAC address is unknown then
.Er ENOENT
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STA_STATS
Return collected statistics for the specified station via
.Va i_data .
The MAC address of the desired station is passed in; if it is unknown
.Er ENOENT
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STA_VLAN
Return any VLAN tag assigned to a station via
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_SLOT
Return the slot number for the station in
.Va i_val .
Slot number zero is the master station in a TDMA network.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_SLOTCNT
Return the count of slots in the TDMA network in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_SLOTLEN
Return the length (in usecs) of the TDMA slot assigned to each
station in the network in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_BINTERVAL
Return the number of superframes between Beacon frames in
.Va i_val .
A TDMA network with N slots and slot length T has a superframe of NxT.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TSN
Return whether or not Transitional Security Network (TSN) is enabled in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TURBOP
Return whether Atheros Dynamic Turbo mode is enabled in
.Va i_val .
Dynamic Turbo mode is a non-standard protocol extension available only
on Atheros devices where channel width is dynamically
changed between 20MHz and 40MHz.
Note that enabling Dynamic Turbo mode support does not guarantee use;
both client and access point must use Atheros devices and support must
be enabled on both sides.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TXPARAMS
Return transmit parameters in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TXPOWER
Return the transmit power limit in .5 dBm units in
.Va i_val .
This value represents the effective maximum and is calculated according to
the maximum power allowed by local regulations, any user-specified
power limit, and the maximum power the device is capable of.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TXPOWMAX
Return the user-specified maximum transmit power in .5 dBm units in
.Va i_val .
The maximum setting is applied after any regulatory cap.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEP
Return the current WEP status in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are:
.Dv IEEE80211_WEP_ON
(enabled for all packets sent and received),
.Dv IEEE80211_WEP_OFF
(disabled),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_WEP_MIXED
(enabled for transmit and receive but also willing to receive
unencrypted frames).
This request is deprecated; use
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PRIVACY
and
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_UNENCRYPTED
instead.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPKEY
Return the requested WEP key via
.Va i_data .
The key number is specified in
.Va i_val
and may be 0-3.
If the device does not support returning the WEP key or the user is not
root then the key may be returned as all zeros.
This request is deprecated in favor of
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAKEY .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPTXKEY
Return the number of the WEP key used for transmission in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME
Return whether 802.11e/WME/WMM support is enabled in
.Va i_val .
This value will be non-zero when support is enabled and otherwise zero.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMIN
Return the WME CWmin setting (log2) for the specified Access Class (AC) in
.Va i_val .
The AC is passed in through
.Va i_len
together with an optional IEEE80211_WMEPARAM_BSS flag to indicate if the
parameter for the BSS or the channel is desired.
If WME is not supported then
.Er EINVAL
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMAX
Return the WME CWmax setting (log2) for the specified Access Class (AC) in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMIN
above for more details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_AIFS
Return the WME AIFS setting for the specified Access Class (AC) in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMIN
above for more details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_TXOPLIMIT
Return the WME TxOpLimit (msec) for the specified Access Class (AC) in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMIN
above for more details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_ACM
Return the WME Admission Control Mechanism (ACM) setting
for the specified Access Class (AC) in
.Va i_val .
This value is meaningful only for the BSS (not channel).
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMIN
above for more details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_ACKPOLICY
Return the WME ACK Policy setting
for the specified Access Class (AC) in
.Va i_val .
When this value is zero frames will be transmitted without waiting for
an Acknowledgement.
This value is meaningful only for the channel (not BSS).
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMIN
above for more details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPA
Return the WPA configuration in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are
0 (WPA is not enabled),
1 (WPA1 is enabled),
2 (WPA2/802.11i is enabled),
and
3 (WPA1 and WPA2/802.11i are both enabled).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAIE
Return any WPA information element for an associated station via
.Va i_data .
The request passed in through
.Va i_data
identifies the MAC address of the desired station.
If an RSN (802.11i) element is present it is returned; otherwise any WPA
element is returned.
Note this request is deprecated; use
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAIE2
instead.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAIE2
Return any WPA information elements for an associated station via
.Va i_data .
The request passed in through
.Va i_data
identifies the MAC address of the desired station.
One or both of RSN (802.11i) and WPA elements may be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAKEY
Return the requested cryptographic key in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
The key number is specified in
.Va i_val
and may be 0-3.
A key number of zero is used to retrieve a station's unicast cipher key
when operating with WPA enabled.
If the user is not root then the key data returned is all zeros.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPS
Return whether or not Wi-FI Protected Setup (WPS) is enabled in
.Va i_val .
.El
.Pp
For
.Dv SIOCS80211
the following values of
.Va i_type
are valid.
Note that changing a value on an interface that is running may
cause the interface to be
.Sq reset .
Resets may be handled without altering the state if the parameter
does not affect the MLME state (e.g. RTS threshold), but in some
cases the interface may need to scan for a new network or clear
state (including any associated stations); in that case the interface
is said to be
.Sq restarted
(it is equivalent to marking the interface down and back up).
The information below identifies whether changing a value affects the
state of a running interface.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_ADDMAC
Add an entry to the MAC address Access Control List (ACL) database using
the value pointed to by
.Va i_data .
The
.Xr wlan_acl 4
module must be installed and enabled or
.Er EINVAL
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU
Set whether or not AMPDU is enabled for transmit and/or receive
using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface operating on an HT channel
to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU_DENSITY
Set the minimum density for bursting AMPDU frames to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU_DENSITY
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU_LIMIT
Set the limit on the size of AMPDU frames to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMPDU_LIMIT
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMSDU
Set whether or not AMSDU is enabled for transmit and/or receive
using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface operating on an HT channel
to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMSDU
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMSDU_LIMIT
Set the limit on the size of AMSDU frames to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AMSDU_LIMIT
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_APBRIDGE
Set whether AP bridging is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_APBRIDGE
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_APPIE
Set an application information element using the data pointed to by
.Va i_data .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted if the WPA
information element is changed.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_APPIE
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AUTHMODE
Set the current authentication mode using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AUTHMODE
above for details.
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BEACON_INTERVAL
Set the time between Beacon frames (in TU) to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN
Set whether background scanning is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_IDLE
Set the minimum time (in msecs) a station must be idle
before it will do a background scan to the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BGSCAN_INTERVAL
Set the minimum time (seconds) between background scan operations to the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BMISSTHRESHOLD
Set the number of consecutive missed Beacon frames before the system will
attempt to roam to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BSSID
Set the 802.11 MAC address for the desired BSS identifier according to
.Va i_data .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_BURST
Set whether or not packet bursting is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CHANNEL
Set the desired/current channel to the value given by
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to
immediately change to the specified channel if possible;
otherwise the interface will be restarted.
Note this request is deprecated; use
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CURCHAN
instead.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CHANLIST
Set the list of available channels using the channel list pointed to by
.Va i_data .
The channel list is a bit vector with bit N set to 1 if
IEEE channel number N is available for use.
The specified channel list is checked against the set of supported
channels and any channels not supported are silently ignored.
If the intersection of the channel list and the supported channels is empty
.Er EINVAL
is returned.
Note the current channel may be marked invalid after installing a
new channel list.
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_COUNTERMEASURES
Set whether TKIP Countermeasures are enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request can only be used when the authentication mode is set
WPA; otherwise
.Er EOPNOTSUPP
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CURCHAN
Set the current channel using the information referenced by
.Va i_data .
This request causes a running interface to
immediately change to the specified channel if possible;
otherwise the interface will be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DELKEY
Delete the key specified by the information referenced by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DELMAC
Remove an entry in the MAC address Access Control List (ACL) database using
the value pointed to by
.Va i_data .
The
.Xr wlan_acl 4
module must be installed and enabled or
.Er EINVAL
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DFS
Set whether or not Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS) is enabled
using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request will fail with
.Er EINVAL
if 802.11h support is not enabled.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DFS
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DOTD
Set whether or not 802.11d support is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DOTD
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DOTH
Return whether 802.11h support is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DOTH
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DROPUNENCRYPTED
Set whether unencrypted packets transmit/received should be discarded
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DTIM_PERIOD
Set the period (in beacon intervals) between DTIM events to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DWDS
Set whether or not Dynamic WDS support is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DWDS
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_FF
Set whether Atheros fast-frames support is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_FF
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_FRAGTHRESHOLD
Set the threshold (in bytes) for enabling fragmentation frames using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_FRAGTHRESHOLD
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_GREENFIELD
Set whether or not Greenfield preamble use is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_GREENFIELD
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HIDESSID
Set whether SSID hiding/cloaking is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HIDESSID
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTCOMPAT
Set whether or not 802.11n compatibility support is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset if operating on HT channel.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTCOMPAT
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTCONF
Set automatic promotion of HT channels using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTCONF
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTPROTMODE
Set the technique used to protect HT frames in a mixed 802.11n network
using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HTPROTMODE
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HWMP_MAXHOPS
Set the maximum acceptable hop count in an HWMP path according to
.Va i_val .
Values must be in the range [0-255].
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_HWMP_ROOTMODE
Set the Mesh root mode operation according to
.Va i_val .
Valid values are
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_DISABLED
(root mode is disabled),
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_NORMAL
(send broadcast Path Request frames),
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_PROACTIVE
(send broadcast Path Request frames and force replies)
and
.Dv IEEE80211_HWMP_ROOTMODE_RANN
(send broadcast Root Announcement (RANN) frames).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_INACTIVITY
Set whether or not the system handles inactivity processing using the value in
.Va i_val .
When inactivity processing is enabled the system will track stations
that have not transmitted frames and periodically probe them to
check if they are still present.
Stations that are inactive and do not respond to probes are dropped.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MACCMD
Change the state of the MAC address Access Control List (ACL) system.
There are several requests supported:
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_POLICY_OPEN
(set the current policy to disable ACL use),
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_POLICY_ALLOW
(set the current policy to allow only addresses listed in the database),
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_POLICY_DENY
(set the current policy to deny addresses listed in the database),
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_POLICY_RADUS
(set the current policy to enable use of a RADIUS backend),
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_FLUSH
(flush all addresses from the database),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_MACCMD_DETACH
(detach the ACL subsystem, disabling it).
The
.Xr wlan_acl 4
module must be installed or
.Er EINVAL
will be returned.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_AP
Set whether or not Mesh AP support is enabled using
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_FWRD
Set whether or not packet forwarding support is enabled using
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_ID
Set the Mesh ID using the value pointed to by
.Va i_data .
A Mesh ID can be up to
.Dv IEEE80211_MESHID_LEN
bytes long.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_PP_METRIC
Set the link metric protocol using the value pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_PP_PATH
Set the path selection protocol using the value pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_RTCMD
Manipulate the state of the Mesh routing tables.
Several requests are supported:
.Dv IEEE80211_MESH_RTCMD_FLUSH
(flush the contents of the routing table),
.Dv IEEE80211_MESH_RTCMD_ADD
(add an entry for the MAC address specified in
.Va i_data
and start the Peer discovery process),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_MESH_RTCMD_DELETE
(delete the entry corresponding to the MAC address specified in
.Va i_data ).
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MESH_TTL
Set the Mesh Time To Live (TTL) setting installed in packets
transmitted by this mesh node using
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_MLME
Explicitly control the MLME state machine for a station using the
MLME request pointed to by
.Va i_data .
There are several MLME operations supported:
.Dv IEEE80211_MLME_ASSOC
(request association to an access point),
.Dv IEEE80211_MLME_DIASSOC
(diassociate the specified station),
.Dv IEEE80211_MLME_DEAUTH
(deauthenticate the specified station),
.Dv IEEE80211_MLME_AUHORIZE
(mark the specified station authorized to pass data frames),
.Dv IEEE80211_MLME_UNAUTHORIZE
(revoke the specified station's ability to pass data frames),
and
.Dv IEEE80211_MLME_AUTH
(request authentication to an access point).
Note when this facility is used for stations operating in infrastructure mode
the roaming mode should be set to manual.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVE
Set the current powersaving mode to the value in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVE
above for valid values.
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVESLEEP
Set the powersave sleep time in TU to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PRIVACY
Set the current MLME setting for PRIVACY using the value in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PRIVACY
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PROTMODE
Set the current 802.11g protection mode to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PROTMODE
above for details.
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PUREG
Set whether ``pure 11g'' mode is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PUREG
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PUREN
Set whether ``pure 11n'' mode is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PUREN
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_REGDOMAIN
Set the regulatory state using the data referenced by
.Va i_data .
This request can only be issued when all interfaces cloned from the
underlying physical device are marked down; otherwise
.Er EBUSY
is returned.
Note the new regulatory data may invalidate any desired channel.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_RIFS
Set whether or not Reduced InterFrame Spacing (RIFS) is enabled
using the value in
.Va i_val .
This  setting is meaningful only when operating with 802.11n on an HT channel.
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_ROAM
Set station roaming parameters using the data pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_ROAMING
Set the current roaming mode to the value in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_ROAMING
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_RTSTHRESHOLD
Set the threshold (in bytes) for enabling transmission of RTS frames
to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_RTSTHRESHOLD
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SCANVALID
Set the age (in seconds) that results from a scan operation will be
considered valid.
When scan results are no longer valid and they are needed (e.g. to roam) the
system will initiate a scan operation to replenish the scan cache.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SCAN_REQ
Request a scan operation using the parameters pointed to by
.Va i_val .
The underlying device must be running or
.Er ENXIO
will be returned.
Values for
.Va sr_duration ,
.Va sr_mindwell ,
and
.Va sr_maxdwell
shorter than 1 clock tick are rounded up to a tick.
If more SSID's are supplied than the system is capable of handling
the extra ones are silently ignored.
If a scan operation is already in progress the request will be
(silently) ignored.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SCAN_CANCEL
Cancel any pending/active scan operation.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SHORTGI
Set whether or not Short Guard Interval (SGI) is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
Note SGI is only used when operating on an HT (802.11n) channel.
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SMPS
Set the Spatial Multiplexing Power Save (SMPS) setting to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SMPS
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SSID
Set the desired SSID using the value pointed to by
.Va i_data .
The string may be at most IEEE80211_NWID_LEN bytes.
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STA_STATS
Clear accumulated statistics for the specified station.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STA_VLAN
Set the VLAN tag for the specified station using the information pointed to by
.Va i_data .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_BINTERVAL
Set the interval between Beacon frames to the value in
.Va i_val .
Values must be positive.
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_SLOT
Set the current TDMA slot to the value in
.Va i_val .
Values must be in the range [0-slotcnt].
Slot 0 identifies the master in the TDMA network; if it running it will
immediately start sending Beacon frames.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_SLOTCNT
Set the number of slots in the TDMA network to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TDMA_SLOTLEN
Set the length of the TDMA slot assigned to each station in the network
to the value in
.Va i_val .
Slot lengths must be in the range 200 usecs to 1024 milliseconds
(though values outside the range 1-200ms are unlikely to work well).
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TSN
Set whether or not Transitional Security Network (TSN) is enabled
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TURBOP
Set whether Atheros Dynamic Turbo mode is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TXPARAMS
Set transmit parameters using the data pointed to be
.Va i_data .
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_TXPOWER
Set the maximum transmit power limit in .5 dBm units to the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEP
Set the current WEP mode to the value in
.Va i_val .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEP
above for valid values.
This request causes a running interface to be restarted.
Note this request is deprecated; use
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_PRIVACY
and
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_DROPUNENCRYPTED
instead.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPKEY
Set the WEP key indicated by
.Va i_val
using the data pointed to by
.Va i_data .
Note this request is deprecated; use
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAKEY
instead.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPTXKEY
Set the default transmit key used for transmission to the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME
Set whether or not WME/WMM support is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_ACKPOLICY
Set the WME ACK Policy for the Access Class (AC) specified in
.Va i_len
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_ACM
Set the WME Admission Control Mechanism for the Access Class (AC) specified in
.Va i_len
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_AIFS
Set the WME AIFS parameter for the Access Class (AC) specified in
.Va i_len
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMAX
Set the WME CWmax parameter for the Access Class (AC) specified in
.Va i_len
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_CWMIN
Set the WME CWmin parameter for the Access Class (AC) specified in
.Va i_len
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WME_TXOPLIMIT
Set the WME TxOpLimit parameter for the Access Class (AC) specified in
.Va i_len
using the value in
.Va i_val .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPA
Set the WPA configuration using the value in
.Va i_val .
This request causes a running interface to be reset.
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPA
above for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAKEY
Set the requested cryptographic key using data in the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data .
See
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPAKEY
for details.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WPS
Set whether or not Wi-FI Protected Setup (WPS) is enabled using the value in
.Va i_val .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr wlan_acl 4 ,
.Xr wlan_xauth 4 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
