.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Bjoern A. Zeeb
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract FA8750-11-C-0249
.\" ("MRC2"), as part of the DARPA MRC research programme.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 17, 2014
.Dt NETFPGA10G_NF10BMAC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm netfpga10g_nf10bmac
.Nd driver for the NetFPGA-10G Embedded CPU Ethernet Core
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device netfpga10g_nf10bmac"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for the NetFPGA-10G Embedded CPU Ethernet
Core.
.Sh HARDWARE
The current version of the
.Nm
driver works with one PIO mode interface of the
NetFPGA-10G Embedded CPU Ethernet Core version 1.00a.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T NetFPGA-10G Wiki
.%U https://github.com/NetFPGA/NetFPGA-public/wiki
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This software and this manual page were
developed by SRI International and the University of Cambridge Computer
Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract
.Pq FA8750-11-C-0249
.Pq Do MRC2 Dc ,
as part of the DARPA MRC research programme.
The device driver was written by
.An Bjoern A. Zeeb .
