.\"	$OpenBSD: nfe.4,v 1.7 2006/02/28 08:13:47 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Jonathan Gray <jsg@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 15, 2011
.Dt NFE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nfe
.Nd "NVIDIA nForce MCP Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device nfe"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_nfe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports PCI Ethernet adapters based on the NVIDIA
nForce Media and Communications Processors (MCP), such as
the nForce, nForce 2, nForce 3, CK804, MCP04, MCP51, MCP55,
MCP61, MCP65, MCP67, MCP73, MCP77 and MCP79 Ethernet
controller chips.
.Pp
Supported features include (hardware support provided):
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Receive/Transmit IP/TCP/UDP checksum offload
.It
Hardware VLAN tag insertion/stripping
.It
TCP segmentation offload (TSO)
.It
MSI/MSI-X
.It
Jumbo Frames
.El
.Pp
Support for Jumbo Frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit Jumbo Frames.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width "10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation (recent models only).
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following NVIDIA MCP onboard adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP04 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce 430 MCP12 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce 430 MCP13 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP51 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP55 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP61 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP65 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP67 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP73 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP77 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce MCP79 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce2 MCP2 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce2 400 MCP4 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce2 400 MCP5 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce3 MCP3 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce3 250 MCP6 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce3 MCP7 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce4 CK804 MCP8 Networking Adapter
.It
NVIDIA nForce4 CK804 MCP9 Networking Adapter
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.nfe.msi_disable
Whether or not MSI support is enabled in the driver.
The default value is 0.
.It Va hw.nfe.msix_disable
Whether or not MSI-X support is enabled in the driver.
The default value is 0.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables can be used to modify or monitor
.Nm
behavior.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.nfe.%d.process_limit
Maximum number of Rx events to be processed in the event loop
before rescheduling a taskqueue.
The accepted range is 50 to 255, the default value is 192.
The interface does not need to be brought down and up again
before a change takes effect.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr rgephy 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.9 ,
and then in
.Fx 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jonathan Gray Aq Mt jsg@openbsd.org
and
.An Damien Bergamini Aq Mt damien@openbsd.org .
The
.Nm
driver was ported to
.Fx
by
.An Shigeaki Tagashira Aq Mt shigeaki@se.hiroshima-u.ac.jp .
