.\" Copyright (c) 1996-1999 Whistle Communications, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by Whistle Communications;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use Whistle
.\"    Communications, Inc. trademarks, including the mark "WHISTLE
.\"    COMMUNICATIONS" on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" $Whistle: ng_async.8,v 1.6 1999/01/25 23:46:25 archie Exp $
.\"
.Dd November 13, 2012
.Dt NG_ASYNC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_async
.Nd asynchronous framing netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In netgraph/ng_async.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm async
node type performs conversion between synchronous frames and
asynchronous frames, as defined for the PPP protocol in RFC 1662.
Asynchronous framing uses flag bytes and octet-stuffing
to simulate a frame oriented connection over an octet-oriented
asynchronous serial line.
.Pp
The node transmits and receives asynchronous data on the
.Dv async
hook.
Mbuf boundaries of incoming data are ignored.
Once a complete packet has been received, it is decoded and
stripped of all framing bytes, and transmitted out the
.Dv sync
hook as a single frame.
.Pp
Synchronous frames are transmitted and received on the
.Dv sync
hook.
Packets received on this hook are encoded as asynchronous frames
and sent out on
.Dv async .
Received packets should start with the address and control fields,
or the PPP protocol field if address and control field compression
is employed, and contain no checksum field.
If the first four bytes are
.Dv "0xff 0x03 0xc0 0x21"
(an LCP protocol frame) then complete control character escaping
is enabled for that frame (in PPP, LCP packets are always sent with
no address and control field compression and all control characters
escaped).
.Pp
This node supports
.Dq flag sharing
for packets transmitted on
.Dv async .
This is an optimization where the trailing flag byte
of one frame is shared with the opening flag byte of the next.
Flag sharing between frames is disabled after one second of transmit
idle time.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va async"
.It Va async
Asynchronous connection.
Typically this hook would be connected to a
.Xr ng_tty 4
node, which handles transmission of serial data over a tty device.
.It Va sync
Synchronous connection.
This hook sends and receives synchronous frames.
For PPP, these frames should contain address, control, and protocol fields,
but no checksum field.
Typically this hook would be connected to an individual link hook of a
.Xr ng_ppp 4
type node.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_ASYNC_CMD_SET_CONFIG Pq Ic setconfig
Sets the node configuration, which is described by a
.Dv "struct ng_async_cfg" :
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
struct ng_async_cfg {
	u_char    enabled;  /* Turn encoding on/off */
	uint16_t  amru;     /* Max receive async frame length */
	uint16_t  smru;     /* Max receive sync frame length */
	uint32_t  accm;     /* ACCM encoding */
};
.Ed
The
.Dv enabled
field enables or disables all encoding/decoding functions (default disabled).
When disabled, the node operates in simple
.Dq pass through
mode.
The
.Dv amru
and
.Dv smru
fields are the asynchronous and synchronous MRU (maximum receive unit) values,
respectively.
These both default to 1600; note that the async MRU
applies to the incoming frame length after asynchronous decoding.
The
.Dv accm
field is the asynchronous character control map, which controls the escaping
of characters 0x00 thorough 0x1f (default 0xffffffff).
.It Dv NGM_ASYNC_CMD_GET_CONFIG Pq Ic getconfig
This command returns the current configuration structure.
.It Dv NGM_ASYNC_CMD_GET_STATS Pq Ic getstats
This command returns a
.Dv "struct ng_async_stat"
containing node statistics for packet, octet, and error counts.
.It Dv NGM_ASYNC_CMD_CLR_STATS Pq Ic clrstats
Clears the node statistics.
.El
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_ppp 4 ,
.Xr ng_tty 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Rs
.%A W. Simpson
.%T "PPP in HDLC-link Framing"
.%O RFC 1662
.Re
.Rs
.%A W. Simpson
.%T "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)"
.%O RFC 1661
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type was implemented in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Archie Cobbs Aq Mt archie@FreeBSD.org
