.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Benno Rice <benno@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 8, 2004
.Dt NG_ATMLLC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_atmllc
.Nd ATM LLC netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_atmllc.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm atmllc
node type translates frames in to and out of ATM LLC encapsulation,
as specified by RFC 1483.
In LLC encapsulation the protocol of a given protocol data unit (PDU) is
specified by an IEEE 802.2 LLC header, possibly followed by an IEEE 802.1a
SubNetwork Attachment Point (SNAP) header.
This node currently handles the Ethernet and FDDI protocols.
.Pp
The node transmits and receives ATM PDUs on the
.Va atm
hook.
Received PDUs are decoded and forwarded to the
.Va ether
or
.Va fddi
hooks as appropriate.
Data received on the
.Va ether
or
.Va fddi
hooks are assumed to be full Ethernet or FDDI packets as appropriate and are
encapsulated into a PDU and transmitted via the
.Va atm
hook.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va ether"
.It Va atm
ATM connection.
Typically, this hook would be connected to a
.Xr ng_atm 4
node, which handles transmission of ATM PDUs over an ATM device.
.It Va ether
Ethernet connection.
This hook sends and receives Ethernet frames.
This would normally be connected to an
.Xr ng_eiface 4
node if in use.
.It Va fddi
FDDI connection.
This hook sends and receives FDDI frames.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_atm 4 ,
.Xr ng_eiface 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Rs
.%A J. Heinanen
.%T "Multiprotocol Encapsulation over ATM Adaptation Layer 5"
.%O RFC 1483
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Benno Rice Aq Mt benno@FreeBSD.org
