.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2002 Maksim Yevmenkin <m_evmenkin@yahoo.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id: ng_btsocket.4,v 1.7 2003/05/21 19:37:35 max Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 13, 2012
.Dt NG_BTSOCKET 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_btsocket
.Nd Bluetooth sockets layer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/socket.h
.In sys/bitstring.h
.In netgraph/bluetooth/include/ng_hci.h
.In netgraph/bluetooth/include/ng_l2cap.h
.In netgraph/bluetooth/include/ng_btsocket.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module implements three Netgraph node types.
Each type in its turn implements one protocol within
.Dv PF_BLUETOOTH
domain.
.Sh Dv BLUETOOTH_PROTO_HCI protocol
.Ss Dv SOCK_RAW HCI sockets
Implemented by
.Nm btsock_hci_raw
Netgraph type.
Raw HCI sockets allow sending of raw HCI command datagrams
only to correspondents named in
.Xr send 2
calls.
Raw HCI datagrams (HCI commands, events and data) are generally received with
.Xr recvfrom 2 ,
which returns the next datagram with its return address.
Raw HCI sockets can also be used to control HCI nodes.
.Pp
The Bluetooth raw HCI socket address is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/* Bluetooth version of struct sockaddr for raw HCI sockets */
struct sockaddr_hci {
        u_char	hci_len;      /* total length */
        u_char	hci_family;   /* address family */
	char	hci_node[32]; /* address (size == NG_NODESIZ ) */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Raw HCI sockets support a number of
.Xr ioctl 2
requests such as:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_STATE
Returns current state for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_INIT
Turn on
.Dq inited
bit for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_DEBUG
Returns current debug level for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_SET_DEBUG
Sets current debug level for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_BUFFER
Returns current state of data buffers for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_BDADDR
Returns BD_ADDR for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_FEATURES
Returns the list of features supported by hardware for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_STAT
Returns various statistic counters for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_RESET_STAT
Resets all statistic counters for the HCI node to zero.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_FLUSH_NEIGHBOR_CACHE
Remove all neighbor cache entries for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_NEIGHBOR_CACHE
Returns content of the neighbor cache for the HCI node.
.It Dv SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_CON_LIST
Returns list of active baseband connections (i.e., ACL and SCO links) for
the HCI node.
.It SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_LINK_POLICY_MASK
Returns current link policy settings mask for the HCI node.
.It SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_SET_LINK_POLICY_MASK
Sets current link policy settings mask for the HCI node.
.It SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_PACKET_MASK
Returns current packet mask for the HCI node.
.It SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_SET_PACKET_MASK
Sets current packet mask for the HCI node.
.It SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_GET_ROLE_SWITCH
Returns current value of the role switch parameter for the HCI node.
.It SIOC_HCI_RAW_NODE_SET_ROLE_SWITCH
Sets new value of the role switch parameter for the HCI node.
.El
.Pp
The
.Va net.bluetooth.hci.sockets.raw.ioctl_timeout
variable, that can be examined and set via
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
controls the control request timeout (in seconds) for raw HCI sockets.
.Pp
Raw HCI sockets support filters.
The application can filter certain HCI datagram types.
For HCI event datagrams the application can set additional filter.
The raw HCI socket filter defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/*
 * Raw HCI socket filter.
 *
 * For packet mask use (1 << (HCI packet indicator - 1))
 * For event mask use (1 << (Event - 1))
 */

struct ng_btsocket_hci_raw_filter {
        bitstr_t bit_decl(packet_mask, 32);
        bitstr_t bit_decl(event_mask, (NG_HCI_EVENT_MASK_SIZE * 8));
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Dv SO_HCI_RAW_FILTER
option defined at
.Dv SOL_HCI_RAW
level can be used to obtain via
.Xr getsockopt 2
or change via
.Xr setsockopt 2
raw HCI socket's filter.
.Sh Dv BLUETOOTH_PROTO_L2CAP protocol
The Bluetooth L2CAP socket address is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/* Bluetooth version of struct sockaddr for L2CAP sockets */
struct sockaddr_l2cap {
        u_char    l2cap_len;    /* total length */
        u_char    l2cap_family; /* address family */
        uint16_t  l2cap_psm;    /* Protocol/Service Multiplexor */
        bdaddr_t  l2cap_bdaddr; /* address */
};
.Ed
.Ss Dv SOCK_RAW L2CAP sockets
Implemented by
.Nm btsock_l2c_raw
Netgraph type.
Raw L2CAP sockets do not provide access to raw L2CAP datagrams.
These
sockets used to control L2CAP nodes and to issue special L2CAP requests
such as
.Dv ECHO_REQUEST
and
.Dv GET_INFO
request.
.Pp
Raw L2CAP sockets support number of
.Xr ioctl 2
requests such as:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_NODE_GET_FLAGS
Returns current state for the L2CAP node.
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_NODE_GET_DEBUG
Returns current debug level for the L2CAP node.
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_NODE_SET_DEBUG
Sets current debug level for the L2CAP node.
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_NODE_GET_CON_LIST
Returns list of active baseband connections (i.e., ACL links) for the L2CAP
node.
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_NODE_GET_CHAN_LIST
Returns list of active channels for the L2CAP node.
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_NODE_GET_AUTO_DISCON_TIMO
Returns current value of the auto disconnect timeout for the L2CAP node.
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_NODE_SET_AUTO_DISCON_TIMO
Sets current value of the auto disconnect timeout for the L2CAP node.
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_L2CA_PING
Issues L2CAP
.Dv ECHO_REQUEST .
.It Dv SIOC_L2CAP_L2CA_GET_INFO
Issues L2CAP
.Dv GET_INFO
request.
.El
.Pp
The
.Va net.bluetooth.l2cap.sockets.raw.ioctl_timeout
variable, that can be examined and set via
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
controls the control request timeout (in seconds) for raw L2CAP sockets.
.Ss Dv SOCK_SEQPACKET L2CAP sockets
Implemented by
.Nm btsock_l2c
Netgraph type.
L2CAP sockets are either
.Dq active
or
.Dq passive .
Active sockets initiate connections to passive sockets.
By default, L2CAP sockets are created active; to create a passive socket, the
.Xr listen 2
system call must be used after binding the socket with the
.Xr bind 2
system call.
Only passive sockets may use the
.Xr accept 2
call to accept incoming connections.
Only active sockets may use the
.Xr connect 2
call to initiate connections.
.Pp
L2CAP sockets support
.Dq "wildcard addressing" .
In this case, socket must be bound to
.Dv NG_HCI_BDADDR_ANY
address.
Note that PSM (Protocol/Service Multiplexor) field is always required.
Once a connection has been established, the socket's address is
fixed by the peer entity's location.
The address assigned to the socket is
the address associated with the Bluetooth device through which packets are
being transmitted and received, and PSM (Protocol/Service Multiplexor).
.Pp
L2CAP sockets support number of options defined at
.Dv SOL_L2CAP
level which can be set with
.Xr setsockopt 2
and tested with
.Xr getsockopt 2 :
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv SO_L2CAP_IMTU
Get (set) maximum payload size the local socket is capable of accepting.
.It Dv SO_L2CAP_OMTU
Get maximum payload size the remote socket is capable of accepting.
.It Dv SO_L2CAP_IFLOW
Get incoming flow specification for the socket.
.Bf -emphasis
Not implemented.
.Ef
.It Dv SO_L2CAP_OFLOW
Get (set) outgoing flow specification for the socket.
.Bf -emphasis
Not implemented.
.Ef
.It Dv SO_L2CAP_FLUSH
Get (set) value of the flush timeout.
.Bf -emphasis
Not implemented.
.Ef
.El
.Sh Dv BLUETOOTH_PROTO_RFCOMM protocol
The Bluetooth RFCOMM socket address is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/* Bluetooth version of struct sockaddr for RFCOMM sockets */
struct sockaddr_rfcomm {
        u_char   rfcomm_len;     /* total length */
        u_char   rfcomm_family;  /* address family */
        bdaddr_t rfcomm_bdaddr;  /* address */
        uint8_t  rfcomm_channel; /* channel */
};
.Ed
.Ss Dv SOCK_STREAM RFCOMM sockets
Note that RFCOMM sockets do not have associated Netgraph node type.
RFCOMM sockets are implemented as additional layer on top of L2CAP sockets.
RFCOMM sockets are either
.Dq active
or
.Dq passive .
Active sockets initiate connections to passive sockets.
By default, RFCOMM sockets are created active; to create a passive socket, the
.Xr listen 2
system call must be used after binding the socket with the
.Xr bind 2
system call.
Only passive sockets may use the
.Xr accept 2
call to accept incoming connections.
Only active sockets may use the
.Xr connect 2
call to initiate connections.
.Pp
RFCOMM sockets support
.Dq "wildcard addressing" .
In this case, socket must be bound to
.Dv NG_HCI_BDADDR_ANY
address.
Note that RFCOMM channel field is always required.
Once a connection has been established, the socket's address is fixed by the
peer entity's location.
The address assigned to the socket is the address associated with the
Bluetooth device through which packets are being transmitted and received,
and RFCOMM channel.
.Pp
The following options, which can be tested with
.Xr getsockopt 2
call, are defined at
.Dv SOL_RFCOMM
level for RFCOMM sockets:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv SO_RFCOMM_MTU
Returns the maximum transfer unit size (in bytes) for the underlying RFCOMM
channel.
Note that application still can write/read bigger chunks to/from the socket.
.It Dv SO_RFCOMM_FC_INFO
Return the flow control information for the underlying RFCOMM channel.
.El
.Pp
The
.Va net.bluetooth.rfcomm.sockets.stream.timeout
variable, that can be examined and set via
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
controls the connection timeout (in seconds) for RFCOMM sockets.
.Sh HOOKS
These node types support hooks with arbitrary names (as long as they are
unique) and always accept hook connection requests.
.Sh NETGRAPH CONTROL MESSAGES
These node types support the generic control messages.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
These nodes are persistent and cannot be shut down.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr btsockstat 1 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_bluetooth 4 ,
.Xr ng_hci 4 ,
.Xr ng_l2cap 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module was implemented in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Maksim Yevmenkin Aq Mt m_evmenkin@yahoo.com
.Sh BUGS
Most likely.
Please report if found.
