.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Whistle Communications, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by Whistle Communications;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use Whistle
.\"    Communications, Inc. trademarks, including the mark "WHISTLE
.\"    COMMUNICATIONS" on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" $Whistle: ng_bpf.8,v 1.2 1999/12/03 01:57:12 archie Exp $
.\"
.Dd November 13, 2012
.Dt NG_BPF 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_bpf
.Nd Berkeley packet filter netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In net/bpf.h
.In netgraph.h
.In netgraph/ng_bpf.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm bpf
node type allows Berkeley Packet Filter (see
.Xr bpf 4 )
filters to be applied to data travelling through a Netgraph network.
Each node allows an arbitrary number of connections to arbitrarily
named hooks.
With each hook is associated a
.Xr bpf 4
filter program which is applied to incoming data only, a destination hook
for matching packets, a destination hook for non-matching packets,
and various statistics counters.
.Pp
A
.Xr bpf 4
program returns an unsigned integer, which is normally interpreted as
the length of the prefix of the packet to return.
In the context of this
node type, returning zero is considered a non-match, in which case the
entire packet is delivered out the non-match destination hook.
Returning a value greater than zero causes the packet to be truncated
to that length and delivered out the match destination hook.
Either or both destination hooks may be the empty string, or may
not exist, in which case the packet is dropped.
.Pp
New hooks are initially configured to drop all packets.
A new filter program may be installed using the
.Dv NGM_BPF_SET_PROGRAM
control message.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports any number of hooks having arbitrary names.
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_BPF_SET_PROGRAM Pq Ic setprogram
This command sets the filter program that will be applied to incoming
data on a hook.
The following structure must be supplied as an argument:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
struct ng_bpf_hookprog {
  char            thisHook[NG_HOOKSIZ];     /* name of hook */
  char            ifMatch[NG_HOOKSIZ];      /* match dest hook */
  char            ifNotMatch[NG_HOOKSIZ];   /* !match dest hook */
  int32_t         bpf_prog_len;             /* #insns in program */
  struct bpf_insn bpf_prog[];               /* bpf program */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The hook to be updated is specified in
.Dv thisHook .
The BPF program is the sequence of instructions in the
.Dv bpf_prog
array; there must be
.Dv bpf_prog_len
of them.
Matching and non-matching incoming packets are delivered out the hooks named
.Dv ifMatch
and
.Dv ifNotMatch ,
respectively.
The program must be a valid
.Xr bpf 4
program or else
.Er EINVAL
is returned.
.It Dv NGM_BPF_GET_PROGRAM Pq Ic getprogram
This command takes an
.Tn ASCII
string argument, the hook name, and returns the
corresponding
.Dv "struct ng_bpf_hookprog"
as shown above.
.It Dv NGM_BPF_GET_STATS Pq Ic getstats
This command takes an
.Tn ASCII
string argument, the hook name, and returns the
statistics associated with the hook as a
.Dv "struct ng_bpf_hookstat" .
.It Dv NGM_BPF_CLR_STATS Pq Ic clrstats
This command takes an
.Tn ASCII
string argument, the hook name, and clears the
statistics associated with the hook.
.It Dv NGM_BPF_GETCLR_STATS Pq Ic getclrstats
This command is identical to
.Dv NGM_BPF_GET_STATS ,
except that the statistics are also atomically cleared.
.El
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh EXAMPLES
It is possible to configure a node from the command line, using
.Xr tcpdump 1
to generate raw BPF instructions which are then fed into an
.Xr awk 1
script to create the ASCII form of a
.Dv NGM_BPF_SET_PROGRAM
control message, as demonstrated here:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
#!/bin/sh

PATTERN="tcp dst port 80"
NODEPATH="my_node:"
INHOOK="hook1"
MATCHHOOK="hook2"
NOTMATCHHOOK="hook3"

BPFPROG=$( tcpdump -s 8192 -p -ddd ${PATTERN} | \\
           ( read len ; \\
             echo -n "bpf_prog_len=$len" ; \\
             echo -n "bpf_prog=[" ; \\
             while read code jt jf k ; do \\
                 echo -n " { code=$code jt=$jt jf=$jf k=$k }" ; \\
             done ; \\
             echo " ]" ) )

ngctl msg ${NODEPATH} setprogram { thisHook=\\"${INHOOK}\\" \\
  ifMatch=\\"${MATCHHOOK}\\" \\
  ifNotMatch=\\"${NOTMATCHHOOK}\\" \\
  ${BPFPROG} }
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bpf 4 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type was implemented in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Archie Cobbs Aq Mt archie@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
When built as a loadable kernel module, this module includes the file
.Pa net/bpf_filter.c .
Although loading the module should fail if
.Pa net/bpf_filter.c
already exists in the kernel, currently it does not, and the duplicate
copies of the file do not interfere.
However, this may change in the future.
