.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Nuno Antunes <nuno.antunes@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 13, 2012
.Dt NG_CAR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_car
.Nd Committed Access Rate netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_car.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm car
node type limits traffic flowing through it using:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Single rate three color marker as described in RFC 2697,
.It
Two rate three color marker as described in RFC 2698,
.It
RED-like rate limit algorithm used by Cisco,
.It
Traffic shaping with RED.
.El
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va upper"
.It Va upper
Hook leading to upper layer protocols.
.It Va lower
Hook leading to lower layer protocols.
.El
.Pp
Traffic flowing from
.Va upper
to
.Va lower
is considered
.Sy downstream
traffic.
Traffic flowing from
.Va lower
to
.Va upper
is considered
.Sy upstream
traffic.
.Sh MODES OF OPERATION
Each hook can operate in one of the following modes:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NG_CAR_SINGLE_RATE
Single rate three color marker as described in RFC 2697.
Committed burst packets are counted as green, extended burst packets are
counted as yellow and exceeding packets are counted as red.
Committed burst getting refilled with CIR (Committed Information Rate) speed.
When it is full, exceeded burst getting refilled.
.It Dv NG_CAR_DOUBLE_RATE
Two rate three color marker as described in RFC 2698.
Committed burst packets are counted as green, peak burst packets are counted
as yellow and exceeding packets are counted as red.
Committed burst getting refilled with CIR speed.
Peak burst getting refilled with PIR (Peak Information Rate) speed at the
same time.
.It Dv NG_CAR_RED
Similar to
.Dv NG_CAR_SINGLE_RATE ,
but with different understanding of extended burst.
When normal burst exceeded and extended burst is used, packets are counted
red with probability equal to part of extended burst consumed.
Extended burst getting refilled first.
When it is full, committed burst getting refilled.
This behavior is similar to RED active queue management algorithm.
.Pp
This algorithm is more polite to the TCP traffic than NG_CAR_SINGLE_RATE.
.It Dv NG_CAR_SHAPE
Committed burst packets are counted as green, exceeding packets are delayed
by queue with RED management and counted as yellow.
Packets dropped by queue counted as red.
Queue parameters are hardcoded: length 99 packets, min_th 8 packets, max_p 100%.
.Pp
Traffic shaping is much more polite to the TCP traffic than rate limit on
links with bandwidth * delay product less than 6-8 TCP segments, but it
consumes additional system resources for queue processing.
.El
By default, all information rates are measured in bits per second and bursts
are measured in bytes.
But when NG_CAR_COUNT_PACKETS option is enabled,
rates are measured in packets per second and bursts are in packets.
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages and the following
specific messages.
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_CAR_SET_CONF Pq Ic setconf
Set node configuration to the specified at
.Vt "struct ng_car_bulkconf"
.It Dv NGM_CAR_GET_CONF Pq Ic getconf
Return current node configuration as
.Vt "struct ng_car_bulkconf"
.Bd -literal
struct ng_car_hookconf {
	uint64_t cbs;		/* Committed burst size (bytes) */
	uint64_t ebs;		/* Exceeded/Peak burst size (bytes) */
	uint64_t cir;		/* Committed information rate (bits/s) */
	uint64_t pir;		/* Peak information rate (bits/s) */
	uint8_t  green_action;	/* Action for green packets */
	uint8_t  yellow_action;	/* Action for yellow packets */
	uint8_t  red_action;	/* Action for red packets */
	uint8_t  mode;		/* single/double rate, ... */
	uint8_t  opt;		/* color-aware or color-blind */
};

/* possible actions (..._action) */
enum {
    NG_CAR_ACTION_FORWARD = 1,
    NG_CAR_ACTION_DROP
};

/* operation modes (mode) */
enum {
    NG_CAR_SINGLE_RATE = 0,
    NG_CAR_DOUBLE_RATE,
    NG_CAR_RED,
    NG_CAR_SHAPE
};

/* mode options (opt) */
#define NG_CAR_COUNT_PACKETS	2

struct ng_car_bulkconf {
	struct ng_car_hookconf upstream;
	struct ng_car_hookconf downstream;
};
.Ed
.It Dv NGM_CAR_GET_STATS Pq Ic getstats
Return node statistics as
.Vt "struct ng_car_bulkstats"
.Bd -literal
struct ng_car_hookstats {
	uint64_t passed_pkts;	/* Counter for passed packets */
	uint64_t droped_pkts;	/* Counter for dropped packets */
	uint64_t green_pkts;	/* Counter for green packets */
	uint64_t yellow_pkts;	/* Counter for yellow packets */
	uint64_t red_pkts;	/* Counter for red packets */
	uint64_t errors;	/* Counter for operation errors */
};

struct ng_car_bulkstats {
	struct ng_car_hookstats upstream;
	struct ng_car_hookstats downstream;
};
.Ed
.It Dv NGM_CAR_CLR_STATS Pq Ic clrstats
Clear node statistics.
.It Dv NGM_CAR_GETCLR_STATS Pq Ic getclrstats
Atomically return and clear node statistics.
.El
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Limit outgoing data rate over fxp0 Ethernet interface to 20Mbit/s
and incoming packet rate to 5000pps.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/usr/sbin/ngctl -f- <<-SEQ
	mkpeer fxp0: car lower lower
	name fxp0:lower fxp0_car
	connect fxp0: fxp0_car: upper upper
	msg fxp0_car: setconf { downstream={ cir=20000000 cbs=2500000 ebs=2500000 greenAction=1 yellowAction=1 redAction=2 mode=2 } upstream={ cir=5000 cbs=100 ebs=100 greenAction=1 yellowAction=1 redAction=2 mode=2 opt=2 } }
SEQ
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Rs
.%A J. Heinanen
.%T "A Single Rate Three Color Marker"
.%O RFC 2697
.Re
.Rs
.%A J. Heinanen
.%T "A Two Rate Three Color Marker"
.%O RFC 2698
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Nuno Antunes Aq Mt nuno.antunes@gmail.com
.An Alexander Motin Aq Mt mav@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
At this moment only DROP and FORWARD actions are implemented.
