.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Mark Santcroos <marks@ripe.net>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 19, 2004
.Dt NG_DEVICE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_device
.Nd device netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_device.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Nm device
node is both a netgraph node and a system device interface.
When a
.Nm device
node is created, a new device entry appears which is accessible via the
regular file operators such as
.Xr open 2 ,
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr read 2 ,
.Xr write 2 ,
etc.
.Pp
The first node is created as
.Pa /dev/ngd0 ,
all subsequent nodes
.Pa /dev/ngd1 , /dev/ngd2 ,
etc.
.Sh HOOKS
A
.Nm device
node has a single hook with an arbitrary name.
All data coming in over the hook will be presented to the device
for
.Xr read 2 .
All data coming in from the device entry by
.Xr write 2
will be forwarded to the hook.
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
The
.Nm device
node supports one non-generic control message:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Dv NGM_DEVICE_GET_DEVNAME
Returns device name corresponding to a node.
.El
.\" Additionally, the node accepts
.\" .Xr ioctl 2 Ns s
.\" from the device entry.
.\" These will be encapsulated into
.\" .Xr netgraph 4
.\" messages and send out to the hook.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or upon hook disconnection.
The associated device entry is removed and becomes available
for use by future
.Nm device
nodes.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm device
node type was first implemented in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Mark Santcroos Aq Mt marks@ripe.net
.An Gleb Smirnoff Aq Mt glebius@FreeBSD.org
