.\" Copyright (c) 1996-1999 Whistle Communications, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by Whistle Communications;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use Whistle
.\"    Communications, Inc. trademarks, including the mark "WHISTLE
.\"    COMMUNICATIONS" on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" $Whistle: ng_frame_relay.8,v 1.4 1999/01/25 23:46:26 archie Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 19, 1999
.Dt NG_FRAME_RELAY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_frame_relay
.Nd frame relay netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_frame_relay.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm frame_relay
node type performs encapsulation, de-encapsulation, and multiplexing
of packets using the frame relay protocol.
It supports up to 1024 DLCI's.
The LMI protocol is handled by a separate node type (see
.Xr ng_lmi 4 ) .
.Pp
The
.Dv downstream
hook should be connected to the synchronous line, i.e., the switch.
Then hooks
.Dv dlci0 ,
.Dv dlci1 ,
through
.Dv dlci1023
are available to connect to each of the DLCI channels.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va downstream"
.It Va downstream
The connection to the synchronous line.
.It Va dlciX
Here X is a decimal number from 0 to 1023.
This hook corresponds
to the DLCI X frame relay virtual channel.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports only the generic control messages.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_lmi 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type was implemented in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Julian Elischer Aq Mt julian@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
Technically, frames on DLCI X should not be transmitted to the switch
until the LMI protocol entity on both ends has configured DLCI X as active.
The
.Nm
node type ignores this restriction, and will always pass data received
on a DLCI hook to
.Dv downstream .
Instead, it should query the LMI node first.
