.\" Copyright 2000 The Aerospace Corporation.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3.  The name of The Aerospace Corporation may not be used to endorse or
.\"     promote products derived from this software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION "AS IS" AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Brooks Davis <brooks@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 18, 2001
.Dt NG_GIF_DEMUX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_gif_demux
.Nd demultiplexer for packets from
.Xr ng_gif 4
nodes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_gif_demux.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
netgraph node type demultiplexes the output from
.Xr ng_gif 4
nodes in the
.Xr netgraph 4
networking subsystem.
.Pp
The
.Dv gif
hook is meant to be connected to the
.Dv lower
or
.Dv orphans
hook of an
.Xr ng_gif 4
node.
The
.Dv inet , inet6 , atalk , ipx , atm , natm ,
and
.Dv ns
hooks output frames of the given type when they are received on the
.Dv gif
hook.
When a frame is received on one of these hooks, it is encapsulated and
sent out the
.Dv gif
hook.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv inet6"
.It Va gif
Connection to the
.Dv lower
or
.Dv orphans
hook of an
.Xr ng_gif 4
node.
.It Va inet
Hook for input and output of IP frames.
.It Va inet6
Hook for input and output of IPv6 frames.
.It Va atalk
Hook for input and output of AppleTalk frames.
.It Va ipx
Hook for input and output of IPX frames.
.It Va atm
Hook for input and output of ATM frames.
.It Va natm
Hook for input and output of NATM frames.
.It Va ns
Hook for input and output of NS frames.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports only the generic control messages.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gif 4 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_gif 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr ngctl 8 ,
.Xr nghook 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Brooks Davis Aq Mt brooks@FreeBSD.org
