.\" Copyright 2000 The Aerospace Corporation.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3.  The name of The Aerospace Corporation may not be used to endorse or
.\"     promote products derived from this software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION "AS IS" AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE  POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Brooks Davis <brooks@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 18, 2001
.Dt NG_GIF 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_gif
.Nd generic tunnel interface netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_gif.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
netgraph node type allows
.Xr gif 4
interfaces to interact with
the
.Xr netgraph 4
networking subsystem.
Once the
.Nm
module is loaded in the kernel, a node is automatically created
for each
.Xr gif 4
interface in the system.
Each node will attempt to name itself with the same name
as the associated interface.
All
.Nm
nodes are persistent for as long as the interface itself exists.
.Pp
Two hooks are supported:
.Dv lower
and
.Dv orphans .
The hook name
.Dv divert
may be used as an alias for
.Dv lower ,
and is provided for compatibility with
.Xr ng_ether 4 .
In reality the two names represent the same hook.
.Pp
The
.Dv lower
hook is a connection to the raw
.Xr gif 4
device.
When connected, all incoming packets are diverted out this hook.
Writing to this hook results in a raw encapsulated packet being transmitted
by the device.
Normal outgoing packets are not affected by
.Dv lower
being connected.
.Pp
The
.Dv orphans
hook is equivalent to
.Dv lower ,
except that only unrecognized packets (that would otherwise be discarded)
are written to the hook, and normal incoming traffic is unaffected.
At most one of
.Dv orphans
and
.Dv lower
may be connected at any time.
.Pp
In all cases, frames are raw packets with the address family of the
packet attached to the front.
.Pp
When no hooks are connected, packets flow normally upwards and downwards.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va orphans"
.It Va lower
Connection to the lower device link layer.
.It Va orphans
Like
.Dv lower ,
but only receives unrecognized packets.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports only the generic control messages.
.Sh EXAMPLES
This command dumps all unrecognized packets received by the
.Li gif0
interface to standard output decoded in hex and ASCII:
.Pp
.Dl "nghook -a gif0: orphans"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gif 4 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr ngctl 8 ,
.Xr nghook 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Brooks Davis Aq Mt brooks@FreeBSD.org
