.\" Copyright (c) 1996-1999 Whistle Communications, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by Whistle Communications;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use Whistle
.\"    Communications, Inc. trademarks, including the mark "WHISTLE
.\"    COMMUNICATIONS" on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" $Whistle: ng_iface.8,v 1.5 1999/01/25 23:46:26 archie Exp $
.\"
.Dd February 6, 2019
.Dt NG_IFACE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_iface
.Nd interface netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_iface.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An
.Nm iface
node is both a netgraph node and a system networking interface.
When an
.Nm iface
node is created, a new interface appears which is accessible via
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Nm Iface
node interfaces are named
.Dv ng0 ,
.Dv ng1 ,
etc.
When a node is shutdown, the corresponding interface is removed
and the interface name becomes available for reuse by future
.Nm iface
nodes; new nodes always take the first unused interface.
The node itself is assigned the same name as its interface, unless the name
already exists, in which case the node remains unnamed.
.Pp
An
.Nm iface
node has a single hook corresponding to each supported protocol.
Packets transmitted via the interface flow out the corresponding
protocol-specific hook.
Similarly, packets received on a hook appear on the interface as
packets received into the corresponding protocol stack.
The currently supported protocols are IP, IPv6, ATM, NATM, and NS.
.Pp
An
.Nm iface
node can be configured as a point-to-point interface or a broadcast interface.
The configuration can only be changed when the interface is down.
The default mode is point-to-point.
.Pp
.Nm Iface
nodes support the Berkeley Packet Filter (BPF).
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va inet6"
.It Va inet
Transmission and reception of IP packets.
.It Va inet6
Transmission and reception of IPv6 packets.
.It Va atm
Transmission and reception of ATM packets.
.It Va natm
Transmission and reception of NATM packets.
.It Va ns
Transmission and reception of NS packets.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_IFACE_GET_IFNAME Pq Ic getifname
Returns the name of the associated interface as a
.Dv NUL Ns -terminated
.Tn ASCII
string.
Normally this is the same as the name of the node.
.It Dv NGM_IFACE_GET_IFINDEX Pq Ic getifindex
Returns the global index of the associated interface as a 32 bit integer.
.It Dv NGM_IFACE_POINT2POINT Pq Ic point2point
Set the interface to point-to-point mode.
The interface must not currently be up.
.It Dv NGM_IFACE_BROADCAST Pq Ic broadcast
Set the interface to broadcast mode.
The interface must not currently be up.
.El
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message.
The associated interface is removed and becomes available
for use by future
.Nm iface
nodes.
.Pp
Unlike most other node types, an
.Nm iface
node does
.Em not
go away when all hooks have been disconnected; rather, and explicit
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message is required.
.Sh ALTQ Support
The
.Nm
interface supports ALTQ bandwidth management feature.
However,
.Nm
is a special case, since it is not a physical interface with limited bandwidth.
One should not turn ALTQ on
.Nm
if the latter corresponds to some tunneled connection, e.g.\& PPPoE or PPTP.
In this case, ALTQ should be configured on the interface that is used to
transmit the encapsulated packets.
In case when your graph ends up with some kind of serial line, either
synchronous or modem, the
.Nm
is the right place to turn ALTQ on.
.Sh Nesting
.Nm
supports nesting, a configuration when traffic of one
.Nm
interface flows through the other.
The default maximum allowed nesting level is 2.
It can be changed at runtime setting
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
.Va net.graph.iface.max_nesting
to the desired level of nesting.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr bpf 4 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_cisco 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Xr sysctl
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm iface
node type was implemented in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Archie Cobbs Aq Mt archie@FreeBSD.org
