.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2002 Packet Design, LLC.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty,
.\" use and redistribution of this software, in source or object code
.\" forms, with or without modifications are expressly permitted by
.\" Packet Design; provided, however, that:
.\"
.\"    (i)  Any and all reproductions of the source or object code
.\"         must include the copyright notice above and the following
.\"         disclaimer of warranties; and
.\"    (ii) No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use
.\"         Packet Design trademarks, including the mark "PACKET DESIGN"
.\"         on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as such
.\"         appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY PACKET DESIGN "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, PACKET DESIGN MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE,
.\" OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.  PACKET DESIGN DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE,
.\" OR MAKE ANY REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY,
.\" RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.  IN NO EVENT SHALL PACKET DESIGN BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES, LOSS OF
.\" USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY THEORY OF
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF
.\" THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF PACKET DESIGN IS ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 13, 2012
.Dt NG_L2TP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_l2tp
.Nd L2TP protocol netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In netgraph/ng_l2tp.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm l2tp
node type implements the encapsulation layer of the L2TP protocol
as described in RFC 2661.
This includes adding the L2TP packet header for outgoing packets
and verifying and removing it for incoming packets.
The node maintains the L2TP sequence number state and handles
control session packet acknowledgment and retransmission.
.Sh HOOKS
The
.Nm l2tp
node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va session_hhhh"
.It Va lower
L2TP frames.
.It Va ctrl
Control packets.
.It Va session_hhhh
Session 0xhhhh data packets.
.El
.Pp
L2TP control and data packets are transmitted to, and received from,
the L2TP peer via the
.Dv lower
hook.
Typically this hook would be connected to the
.Dv "inet/dgram/udp"
hook of an
.Xr ng_ksocket 4
node for L2TP over UDP.
.Pp
The
.Dv ctrl
hook connects to the local L2TP management entity.
L2TP control messages (without any L2TP headers) are transmitted
and received on this hook.
Messages written to this hook are guaranteed to be delivered to the
peer reliably, in order, and without duplicates.
.Pp
Packets written to the
.Dv ctrl
hook must contain a two byte session ID prepended to the frame
(in network order).
This session ID is copied to the outgoing L2TP header.
Similarly, packets read from the
.Dv ctrl
hook will have the received session ID prepended.
.Pp
Once an L2TP session has been created, the corresponding session
hook may be used to transmit and receive the session's data frames:
for the session with session ID
.Dv 0xabcd ,
the hook is named
.Dv session_abcd .
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_SET_CONFIG Pq Ic setconfig
This command updates the configuration of the node.
It takes a
.Vt "struct ng_l2tp_config"
as an argument:
.Bd -literal
/* Configuration for a node */
struct ng_l2tp_config {
    u_char      enabled;        /* enables traffic flow */
    u_char      match_id;       /* tunnel id must match 'tunnel_id' */
    uint16_t    tunnel_id;      /* local tunnel id */
    uint16_t    peer_id;        /* peer's tunnel id */
    uint16_t    peer_win;       /* peer's max recv window size */
    uint16_t    rexmit_max;     /* max retransmits before failure */
    uint16_t    rexmit_max_to;  /* max delay between retransmits */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va enabled
field enables packet processing.
Each time this field is changed back to zero the sequence
number state is reset.
In this way, reuse of a node is possible.
.Pp
The
.Va tunnel_id
field configures the local tunnel ID for the control connection.
The
.Va match_id
field determines how incoming L2TP packets with a tunnel ID
field different from
.Va tunnel_id
are handled.
If
.Va match_id
is non-zero, they will be dropped; otherwise, they will be dropped
only if the tunnel ID is non-zero.
Typically
.Va tunnel_id
is set to the local tunnel ID as soon as it is known and
.Va match_id
is set to non-zero after receipt of the SCCRP or SCCCN control message.
.Pp
The peer's tunnel ID should be set in
.Va peer_id
as soon as it is learned, typically after receipt of a SCCRQ or SCCRP
control message.
This value is copied into the L2TP header for outgoing packets.
.Pp
The
.Va peer_win
field should be set from the
.Dq "Receive Window Size"
AVP received from the peer.
The default value for this field is one; zero is an invalid value.
As long as
.Va enabled
is non-zero, this value may not be decreased.
.Pp
The
.Va rexmit_max
and
.Va rexmit_max_to
fields configure packet retransmission.
.Va rexmit_max_to
is the maximum retransmission delay between packets, in seconds.
The retransmit delay will start at a small value and increase
exponentially up to this limit.
The
.Va rexmit_max
sets the maximum number of times a packet will be retransmitted
without being acknowledged before a failure condition is declared.
Once a failure condition is declared, each additional retransmission
will cause the
.Nm l2tp
node to send a
.Dv NGM_L2TP_ACK_FAILURE Pq Ic ackfailure
control message back to the node that sent the last
.Dv NGM_L2TP_SET_CONFIG .
Appropriate action should then be taken to shutdown the control connection.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_GET_CONFIG Pq Ic getconfig
Returns the current configuration as a
.Vt "struct ng_l2tp_config" .
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_SET_SESS_CONFIG Pq Ic setsessconfig
This control message configures a single data session.
The corresponding hook must already be connected before sending this command.
The argument is a
.Vt "struct ng_l2tp_sess_config" :
.Bd -literal
/* Configuration for a session hook */
struct ng_l2tp_sess_config {
    uint16_t    session_id;     /* local session id */
    uint16_t    peer_id;        /* peer's session id */
    u_char      control_dseq;   /* whether we control data sequencing */
    u_char      enable_dseq;    /* whether to enable data sequencing */
    u_char      include_length; /* whether to include length field */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va session_id
and
.Va peer_id
fields configure the local and remote session IDs, respectively.
.Pp
The
.Va control_dseq
and
.Va enable_dseq
fields determine whether sequence numbers are used with L2TP data packets.
If
.Va enable_dseq
is zero, then no sequence numbers are sent and incoming sequence numbers
are ignored.
Otherwise, sequence numbers are included on outgoing packets and checked
on incoming packets.
.Pp
If
.Va control_dseq
is non-zero, then the setting of
.Va enable_dseq
will never change except by another
.Dv NGM_L2TP_SET_SESS_CONFIG
control message.
If
.Va control_dseq
is zero, then the peer controls whether sequence numbers are used:
if an incoming L2TP data packet contains sequence numbers,
.Va enable_dseq
is set to one, and conversely if an incoming L2TP data packet does not
contain sequence numbers,
.Va enable_dseq
is set to zero.
The current value of
.Va enable_dseq
is always accessible via the
.Dv NGM_L2TP_GET_SESS_CONFIG
control message (see below).
Typically an LNS would set
.Va control_dseq
to one while a LAC would set
.Va control_dseq
to zero (if the Sequencing Required AVP were not sent), thus giving
control of data packet sequencing to the LNS.
.Pp
The
.Va include_length
field determines whether the L2TP header length field is included
in outgoing L2TP data packets.
For incoming packets, the L2TP length field is always checked when present.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_GET_SESS_CONFIG Pq Ic getsessconfig
This command takes a two byte session ID as an argument and returns
the current configuration for the corresponding data session as a
.Vt "struct ng_l2tp_sess_config" .
The corresponding session hook must be connected.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_GET_STATS Pq Ic getstats
This command returns a
.Vt "struct ng_l2tp_stats"
containing statistics of the L2TP tunnel.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_CLR_STATS Pq Ic clrstats
This command clears the statistics for the L2TP tunnel.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_GETCLR_STATS Pq Ic getclrstats
Same as
.Dv NGM_L2TP_GET_STATS ,
but also atomically clears the statistics as well.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_GET_SESSION_STATS Pq Ic getsessstats
This command takes a two byte session ID as an argument and returns a
.Vt "struct ng_l2tp_session_stats"
containing statistics for the corresponding data session.
The corresponding session hook must be connected.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_CLR_SESSION_STATS Pq Ic clrsessstats
This command takes a two byte session ID as an argument and
clears the statistics for that data session.
The corresponding session hook must be connected.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_GETCLR_SESSION_STATS Pq Ic getclrsessstats
Same as
.Dv NGM_L2TP_GET_SESSION_STATS ,
but also atomically clears the statistics as well.
.It Dv NGM_L2TP_SET_SEQ Pq Ic setsequence
This command sets the sequence numbers of a not yet enabled node.
It takes a
.Vt "struct ng_l2tp_seq_config"
as argument, where
.Va xack
and
.Va nr
respectively
.Va ns
and
.Va rack
must be the same.
This option is particularly useful if one receives and processes
the first packet entirely in userspace and wants to hand over further
processing to the node.
.El
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_ksocket 4 ,
.Xr ng_ppp 4 ,
.Xr ng_pptpgre 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Rs
.%A W. Townsley
.%A A. Valencia
.%A A. Rubens
.%A G. Pall
.%A G. Zorn
.%A B. Palter
.%T "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol L2TP"
.%O RFC 2661
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm l2tp
node type was developed at Packet Design, LLC,
.Pa http://www.packetdesign.com/ .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Archie Cobbs Aq Mt archie@packetdesign.com
