.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Gleb Smirnoff <glebius@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 12, 2018
.Dt NG_NAT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_nat
.Nd "NAT netgraph node type"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_nat.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An
.Nm
node performs network address translation (NAT) of packets
passing through it.
A
.Nm nat
node uses
.Xr libalias 3
engine for packet aliasing.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type has two hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va out"
.It Va out
Packets received on this hook are considered outgoing and will be
masqueraded to a configured address.
.It Va in
Packets coming on this hook are considered incoming and will be
dealiased.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_NAT_SET_IPADDR Pq Ic setaliasaddr
Configure aliasing address for a node.
After both hooks have been connected and aliasing address was configured,
a node is ready for aliasing operation.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_SET_MODE Pq Ic setmode
Set node's operation mode using supplied
.Vt "struct ng_nat_mode" .
.Bd -literal
struct ng_nat_mode {
	uint32_t	flags;
	uint32_t	mask;
};
/* Supported flags: */
#define NG_NAT_LOG			0x01
#define NG_NAT_DENY_INCOMING		0x02
#define NG_NAT_SAME_PORTS		0x04
#define NG_NAT_UNREGISTERED_ONLY	0x10
#define NG_NAT_RESET_ON_ADDR_CHANGE	0x20
#define NG_NAT_PROXY_ONLY		0x40
#define NG_NAT_REVERSE			0x80
.Ed
.It Dv NGM_NAT_SET_TARGET Pq Ic settarget
Configure target address for a node.
When an incoming packet not associated with any pre-existing aliasing
link arrives at the host machine, it will be sent to the specified address.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_PORT Pq Ic redirectport
Redirect incoming connections arriving to given port(s) to
another host and port(s).
The following
.Vt "struct ng_nat_redirect_port"
must be supplied as argument.
.Bd -literal
#define NG_NAT_DESC_LENGTH	64
struct ng_nat_redirect_port {
	struct in_addr	local_addr;
	struct in_addr	alias_addr;
	struct in_addr	remote_addr;
	uint16_t	local_port;
	uint16_t	alias_port;
	uint16_t	remote_port;
	uint8_t		proto;
	char		description[NG_NAT_DESC_LENGTH];
};
.Ed
.Pp
Redirection is assigned an unique ID which is returned as
response to this message, and
information about redirection added to
list of static redirects which later can be retrieved by
.Dv NGM_NAT_LIST_REDIRECTS
message.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_ADDR Pq Ic redirectaddr
Redirect traffic for public IP address to a machine on the
local network.
This function is known as
.Em static NAT .
The following
.Vt "struct ng_nat_redirect_addr"
must be supplied as argument.
.Bd -literal
struct ng_nat_redirect_addr {
	struct in_addr	local_addr;
	struct in_addr	alias_addr;
	char		description[NG_NAT_DESC_LENGTH];
};
.Ed
.Pp
Unique ID for this redirection is returned as response to this message.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_PROTO Pq Ic redirectproto
Redirect incoming IP packets of protocol
.Va proto
(see
.Xr protocols 5 )
to a machine on the local network.
The following
.Vt "struct ng_nat_redirect_proto"
must be supplied as argument.
.Bd -literal
struct ng_nat_redirect_proto {
	struct in_addr	local_addr;
	struct in_addr	alias_addr;
	struct in_addr	remote_addr;
	uint8_t		proto;
	char		description[NG_NAT_DESC_LENGTH];
};
.Ed
.Pp
Unique ID for this redirection is returned as response to this message.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_DYNAMIC Pq Ic redirectdynamic
Mark redirection with specified ID as dynamic, i.e., it will serve
for exactly one next connection and then will be automatically
deleted from internal links table.
Only fully specified links can be made dynamic.
The redirection with this ID is also immediately deleted from
user-visible list of static redirects (available through
.Dv NGM_NAT_LIST_REDIRECTS
message).
.It Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_DELETE Pq Ic redirectdelete
Delete redirection with specified ID (currently active
connections are not affected).
.It Dv NGM_NAT_ADD_SERVER Pq Ic addserver
Add another server to a pool.
This is used to transparently offload network load on a single server
and distribute the load across a pool of servers, also known as
.Em LSNAT
(RFC 2391).
The following
.Vt "struct ng_nat_add_server"
must be supplied as argument.
.Bd -literal
struct ng_nat_add_server {
	uint32_t	id;
	struct in_addr	addr;
	uint16_t	port;
};
.Ed
.Pp
First, the redirection is set up by
.Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_PORT
or
.Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_ADDR .
Then, ID of that redirection is used in multiple
.Dv NGM_NAT_ADD_SERVER
messages to add necessary number of servers.
For redirections created by
.Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_ADDR ,
the
.Va port
is ignored and could have any value.
Original redirection's parameters
.Va local_addr
and
.Va local_port
are also ignored after
.Dv NGM_NAT_ADD_SERVER
was used (they are effectively replaced by server pool).
.It Dv NGM_NAT_LIST_REDIRECTS Pq Ic listredirects
Return list of configured static redirects as
.Vt "struct ng_nat_list_redirects" .
.Bd -literal
struct ng_nat_listrdrs_entry {
	uint32_t	id;		/* Anything except zero */
	struct in_addr	local_addr;
	struct in_addr	alias_addr;
	struct in_addr	remote_addr;
	uint16_t	local_port;
	uint16_t	alias_port;
	uint16_t	remote_port;
	uint16_t	proto;		/* Valid proto or NG_NAT_REDIRPROTO_ADDR */
	uint16_t	lsnat;		/* LSNAT servers count */
	char		description[NG_NAT_DESC_LENGTH];
};
struct ng_nat_list_redirects {
	uint32_t		total_count;
	struct ng_nat_listrdrs_entry redirects[];
};
#define NG_NAT_REDIRPROTO_ADDR	(IPPROTO_MAX + 3)
.Ed
.Pp
Entries of the
.Va redirects
array returned in the unified format for all redirect types.
Ports are meaningful only if protocol is either TCP or UDP
and
.Em static NAT
redirection (created by
.Dv NGM_NAT_REDIRECT_ADDR )
is indicated by
.Va proto
set to
.Dv NG_NAT_REDIRPROTO_ADDR .
If
.Va lsnat
servers counter is greater than zero, then
.Va local_addr
and
.Va local_port
are also meaningless.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_PROXY_RULE Pq Ic proxyrule
Specify a transparent proxying rule (string must be
supplied as argument).
See
.Xr libalias 3
for details.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_LIBALIAS_INFO Pq Ic libaliasinfo
Return internal statistics of
.Xr libalias 3
instance as
.Vt "struct ng_nat_libalias_info" .
.Bd -literal
struct ng_nat_libalias_info {
	uint32_t	icmpLinkCount;
	uint32_t	udpLinkCount;
	uint32_t	tcpLinkCount;
	uint32_t	sctpLinkCount;
	uint32_t	pptpLinkCount;
	uint32_t	protoLinkCount;
	uint32_t	fragmentIdLinkCount;
	uint32_t	fragmentPtrLinkCount;
	uint32_t	sockCount;
};
.Ed
In case of
.Nm
failed to retrieve a certain counter
from its
.Xr libalias
instance, the corresponding field is returned as
.Va UINT32_MAX .
.It Dv NGM_NAT_SET_DLT Pq Ic setdlt
Sets the data link type on the
.Va in
and
.Va out
hooks.
Currently, supported types are
.Cm DLT_RAW
(raw IP datagrams , no offset applied, the default) and
.Cm DLT_EN10MB
(Ethernet). DLT_ definitions can be found in
.In net/bpf.h .
If you want to work on the
.Xr ipfw 8
level you must use no additional offset by specifying
.Cm DLT_RAW .
If, however, you attach
.Nm
to a network interface directly and
.Cm EN10MB
is specified, then the extra offset will be applied to take into account
link-level header.
In this mode the
.Nm
would also inspect appropriate type field in the Ethernet header and
pass-through any datagrams that are not IP packets.
.It Dv NGM_NAT_GET_DLT Pq Ic getdlt
This control message returns the current data link type of the
.Va in
and
.Va out
hooks.
.El
.Pp
In all redirection messages
.Va local_addr
and
.Va local_port
mean address and port of target machine in the internal network,
respectively.
If
.Va alias_addr
is zero, then default aliasing address (set by
.Dv NGM_NAT_SET_IPADDR )
is used.
Connections can also be restricted to be accepted only
from specific external machines by using non-zero
.Va remote_addr
and/or
.Va remote_port .
Each redirection assigned an ID which can be later used for
redirection manipulation on individual basis (e.g., removal).
This ID guaranteed to be unique until the node shuts down
(it will not be reused after deletion), and is returned to
user after making each new redirection or can be found in
the stored list of all redirections.
The
.Va description
passed to and from node unchanged, together with ID providing
a way for several entities to concurrently manipulate
redirections in automated way.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when both hooks are disconnected.
.Sh EXAMPLES
In the following example, the packets are injected into a
.Nm nat
node using the
.Xr ng_ipfw 4
node.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Create NAT node
ngctl mkpeer ipfw: nat 60 out
ngctl name ipfw:60 nat
ngctl connect ipfw: nat: 61 in
ngctl msg nat: setaliasaddr x.y.35.8

# Divert traffic into NAT node
ipfw add 300 netgraph 61 all from any to any in via fxp0
ipfw add 400 netgraph 60 all from any to any out via fxp0

# Let packets continue with after being (de)aliased
sysctl net.inet.ip.fw.one_pass=0
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Nm
node can be inserted right after the
.Xr ng_iface 4
node in the graph.
In the following example, we perform masquerading on a
serial line with HDLC encapsulation.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/usr/sbin/ngctl -f- <<-SEQ
	mkpeer cp0: cisco rawdata downstream
	name cp0:rawdata hdlc
	mkpeer hdlc: nat inet in
	name hdlc:inet nat
	mkpeer nat: iface out inet
	msg nat: setaliasaddr x.y.8.35
SEQ
ifconfig ng0 x.y.8.35 x.y.8.1
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Nm
node can also be attached directly to the physical interface
via
.Xr ng_ether 4
node in the graph.
In the following example, we perform masquerading on a
Ethernet interface connected to a public network.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig igb0 inet x.y.8.35 netmask 0xfffff000
route add default x.y.0.1
/usr/sbin/ngctl -f- <<-SEQ
        mkpeer igb0: nat lower in
        name igb0:lower igb0_NAT
        connect igb0: igb0_NAT: upper out
        msg igb0_NAT: setdlt 1
        msg igb0_NAT: setaliasaddr x.y.8.35
SEQ
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr libalias 3 ,
.Xr ng_ipfw 4 ,
.Xr natd 8 ,
.Xr ngctl 8 ,
.Xr ng_ether 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type was implemented in
.Fx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Gleb Smirnoff Aq Mt glebius@FreeBSD.org
