.\" Copyright (c) 1996-1999 Whistle Communications, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by Whistle Communications;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use Whistle
.\"    Communications, Inc. trademarks, including the mark "WHISTLE
.\"    COMMUNICATIONS" on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" $Whistle: ng_rfc1490.8,v 1.4 1999/01/25 23:46:27 archie Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 19, 1999
.Dt NG_RFC1490 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_rfc1490
.Nd RFC 1490 netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_rfc1490.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm rfc1490
node type performs protocol encapsulation, de-encapsulation, and
multiplexing according to RFC 1490 (which has since been updated by RFC 2427).
This particular type of encapsulation is often used on top of frame relay
DLCI channels.
.Pp
The
.Dv downstream
hook is used to transmit and receive encapsulated frames.
On the other side of the node, the
.Dv inet
and
.Dv ppp
hooks are used to transmit and receive raw IP frames and PPP frames,
respectively.
PPP frames are transmitted and received according to
RFC 1973; in particular, frames appearing on the
.Dv ppp
hook begin with the PPP protocol number.
The
.Dv ethernet
hook can be used to transmit and receive Ethernet frames (without a
checksum) in RFC 1490's bridging format.
.Pp
Typically the
.Dv inet
hook is connected to the
.Dv inet
hook of an
.Xr ng_iface 4
node.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va downstream"
.It Va downstream
Connects to the RFC 1490 peer entity.
.It Va ethernet
Transmits and receives bridged raw Ethernet frames, without a checksum.
.It Va inet
Transmits and receives raw IP frames.
.It Va ppp
Transmits and receives PPP frames.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_RFC1490_SET_ENCAP Pq Ic setencap
This command sets encapsulation method for the node.
The desired method must be passed as a string message argument,
and must be one of the following supported encapsulation modes:
.Bl -tag -width ".Qq Li ietf-snap"
.It Qq Li ietf-ip
IP packets are sent using simple RFC1490/2427 encapsulation.
.It Qq Li ietf-snap
IP packets are sent inside SNAP frames.
Also conforms to RFC1490/2427.
.It Qq Li cisco
IP packets are sent and received using proprietary Cisco encapsulation
method.
.El
.It Dv NGM_RFC1490_GET_ENCAP Pq Ic getencap
This command returns current encapsulation method on the node.
.El
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_frame_relay 4 ,
.Xr ng_iface 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Rs
.%A C. Brown
.%A A. Malis
.%T "Multiprotocol Interconnect over Frame Relay"
.%O RFC 2427
.Re
.Rs
.%A W. Simpson
.%T "PPP in Frame Relay"
.%O RFC 1973
.Re
.Pp
.Pa http://www.cisco.com/warp/public/121/frf8modes.pdf
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type was implemented in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Julian Elischer Aq Mt julian@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
Not all of RFC 1490 is implemented.
