.\" Copyright (c) 2001 FreeBSD inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by FreeBSD Inc.;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use FreeBSD
.\"    Inc., Inc. trademarks, including the mark "FREEBSD
.\"    INC." on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY FREEBSD INC. "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, FreeBSD Inc. MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" FreeBSD Inc. DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL FreeBSD Inc. BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF FreeBSD Inc. IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Julian Elischer <julian@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 19, 2001
.Dt NG_SPLIT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_split
.Nd netgraph node to separate incoming and outgoing flows
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_split.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm split
node type is used to split a bidirectional stream of packets into
two separate unidirectional streams of packets.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following three hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va mixed"
.It Va in
Packets received on
.Em in
are forwarded to
.Em mixed .
.It Va out
Packets received on
.Em out
will be discarded as illegal.
.It Va mixed
Packets received on
.Em mixed
are forwarded to
.Em out .
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports only the generic control messages.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type was implemented in
.Fx 3.5
but incorporated into
.Fx
in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Julian Elischer Aq Mt julian@FreeBSD.org
.An Vitaly V. Belekhov Aq Mt vitaly@riss-telecom.ru
