.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Ruslan Ermilov
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 1, 2004
.Dt NG_VLAN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_vlan
.Nd IEEE 802.1Q VLAN tagging netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In netgraph.h
.In netgraph/ng_vlan.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm vlan
node type multiplexes frames tagged according to
the IEEE 802.1Q standard between different hooks.
.Pp
Each node has two special hooks,
.Va downstream
and
.Va nomatch ,
and an arbitrary number of
.Dq vlan
hooks, each associated with a particular VLAN tag.
.Pp
An
.Dv ETHERTYPE_VLAN
frame received on the
.Va downstream
hook with a tag that the node has been configured to filter
is sent out the corresponding
.Dq vlan
hook.
If it does not match any of the configured tags, or is not of a type
.Dv ETHERTYPE_VLAN ,
it is sent out the
.Va nomatch
hook.
If the
.Va nomatch
hook is not connected, the packet is dropped.
.Pp
An Ethernet frame received on the
.Va nomatch
hook is passed unmodified to the
.Va downstream
hook.
.Pp
An Ethernet frame received on any of the
.Dq vlan
hooks is tagged accordingly and sent out the
.Va downstream
hook.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width "Aq Em any valid name"
.It Va downstream
Typically this hook would be connected to a
.Xr ng_ether 4
node, using the
.Va lower
hook.
.It Va nomatch
Typically this hook would also be connected to an
.Xr ng_ether 4
type node using the
.Va upper
hook.
.It Aq Em "any valid name"
Any other hook name will be accepted and should later be associated with
a particular tag.
Typically this hook would be attached to an
.Xr ng_eiface 4
type node using the
.Va ether
hook.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_VLAN_ADD_FILTER Pq Ic addfilter
Associates a hook with the tag.
.It Dv NGM_VLAN_DEL_FILTER Pq Ic delfilter
Disassociates a hook from the tag.
.It Dv NGM_VLAN_GET_TABLE Pq Ic gettable
Returns a table of all hook/tag associations.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
#!/bin/sh

ETHER_IF=rl0

ngctl -f- <<EOF
shutdown ${ETHER_IF}:
mkpeer ${ETHER_IF}: vlan lower downstream
name ${ETHER_IF}:lower vlan
connect ${ETHER_IF}: vlan: upper nomatch
EOF

ngctl mkpeer vlan: eiface vlan123 ether
ngctl msg vlan: addfilter '{ vlan=123 hook="vlan123" }'
.Ed
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_eiface 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8 ,
.Xr nghook 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type appeared in
.Fx 4.10 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Ruslan Ermilov Aq Mt ru@FreeBSD.org
