.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Wind River Systems
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@bsdi.com>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 23, 2010
.Dt NGE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nge
.Nd "National Semiconductor PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device nge"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_nge_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various NICs based on the National Semiconductor
DP83820 and DP83821 Gigabit Ethernet controller chips.
.Pp
The DP83820 supports TBI (ten bit interface) and GMII
transceivers, which means it can be used with either copper or 1000baseX
fiber applications.
The DP83820 supports TCP/IP checksum offload and
VLAN tagging/insertion as well as a 2048-bit multicast hash filter
and up to 4 pattern match buffers.
.Pp
Most cards also use the DP83861 10/100/1000 copper gigabit transceiver
chip, which supports autonegotiation of 10, 100 and 1000Mbps modes in
full or half duplex.
.Pp
The DP83820 and DP83821 also support jumbo frames, which can be
configured via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit jumbo frames.
Using jumbo frames can greatly improve performance for certain tasks,
such as file transfers and data streaming.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width 10baseTXUTP
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseTX
Set 1000baseTX operation over twisted pair.
.Cm full-duplex
and
.Cm half-duplex
modes are supported.
.It Cm 1000baseSX
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
Both
.Cm full-duplex
and
.Cm half-duplex
modes are supported.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width full-duplex
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports National Semiconductor DP83820 and DP83821 based
Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Addtron AEG320T
.It
Ark PC SOHO-GA2500T (32-bit PCI) and SOHO-GA2000T (64-bit PCI)
.It
Asante FriendlyNet GigaNIX 1000TA and 1000TPC
.It
D-Link DGE-500T
.It
Linksys EG1032, revision 1
.It
Netgear GA621
.It
Netgear GA622T
.It
SMC EZ Card 1000 (SMC9462TX)
.It
Surecom Technology EP-320G-TX
.It
Trendware TEG-PCITX (32-bit PCI) and TEG-PCITX2 (64-bit PCI)
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va dev.nge.%d.int_holdoff
Maximum amount of time to delay interrupt processing in units of
100us.
The accepted range is 0 to 255, the default is 1(100us).
Value 0 completely disables the interrupt moderation.
The interface has to be brought down and up again before a change
takes effect.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "nge%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "nge%d: couldn't map ports"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "nge%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "nge%d: no memory for softc struct!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for per-device instance information
during initialization.
.It "nge%d: failed to enable memory mapping!"
The driver failed to initialize PCI shared memory mapping.
This might
happen if the card is not in a bus-master slot.
.It "nge%d: no memory for jumbo buffers!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for jumbo frames during
initialization.
.It "nge%d: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T National Semiconductor DP83820 datasheet
.%U http://www.national.com
.Re
.Rs
.%T National Semiconductor DP83861 datasheet
.%U http://www.national.com
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.4 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@bsdi.com .
