.\"	$OpenBSD: nsphyter.4,v 1.12 2020/01/24 05:08:02 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Jason L. Wright (jason@thought.net)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 24 2020 $
.Dt NSPHYTER 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nsphyter
.Nd National Semiconductor DP83815/DP83843/DP83847 10/100 Ethernet PHY
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "nsphyter* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the National Semiconductor
PHYTER DP83843/DP83847
Ethernet PHYs.
This driver also supports the integrated PHY on the
MacPHYTER DP83815.
These PHYs are found on a variety of Ethernet interfaces.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr mii 4 ,
.Xr nsphy 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
