.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012-2016 Intel Corporation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce at minimum a disclaimer
.\"    substantially similar to the "NO WARRANTY" disclaimer below
.\"    ("Disclaimer") and any redistribution must be conditioned upon
.\"    including a substantially similar Disclaimer requirement for further
.\"    binary redistribution.
.\"
.\" NO WARRANTY
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\"
.\" nvd driver man page.
.\"
.\" Author: Jim Harris <jimharris@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 28, 2016
.Dt NVD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nvd
.Nd NVM Express disk driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into your kernel,
place the following lines in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device nvme"
.Cd "device nvd"
.Ed
.Pp
Or, to load the driver as a module at boot, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nvme_load="YES"
nvd_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver exposes NVM Express (NVMe) namespaces as disks to the kernel disk
storage API.
It depends on the
.Xr nvme 4
driver for notification of existing NVMe namespaces and submission of NVM
I/O commands.
.Pp
Device nodes from the
.Nm
driver will have the format /dev/nvdX and are
.Xr GEOM 4
disks which can be partitioned by
.Xr geom 8 .
Note that device nodes from the
.Xr nvme 4
driver are not
.Xr GEOM 4
disks and cannot be partitioned.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The
.Nm
driver defines a system-wide maximum delete size for NVMe devices.
The default is 1GB.
To select a different value, set the following tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.nvd.delete_max=<delete size in bytes>
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr GEOM 4 ,
.Xr nvme 4 ,
.Xr geom 8 ,
.Xr nvmecontrol 8 ,
.Xr disk 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 9.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was developed by Intel and originally written by
.An Jim Harris Aq Mt jimharris@FreeBSD.org ,
with contributions from Joe Golio at EMC.
.Pp
This man page was written by
.An Jim Harris Aq Mt jimharris@FreeBSD.org .
