.\" Copyright (C) 2013 Emulex
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Emulex Corporation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Contact Information:
.\" freebsd-drivers@emulex.com
.\"
.\" Emulex
.\" 3333 Susan Street
.\" Costa Mesa, CA 92626
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 19, 2012
.Dt OCE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm oce
.Nd "Device driver for Emulex OneConnect 10Gb network adapters"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device oce"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_oce_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Emulex OneConnect adapters come in various skews and with
different combinations of NIC, FCoE and iSCSI functions.
The
.Nm
driver claims the NIC functions in all these adapters.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports VLAN Hardware offload, TCP checksum offload,
TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large receive offload (LRO),
Bonding, Jumbo frames (from 1500 - 9000), Multiple TX queues,
Receive-Side Scaling (RSS) and MSI-X interrupts.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following network adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Emulex BladeEngine 2
.It
Emulex BladeEngine 3
.It
Emulex Lancer
.El
.Sh UPDATING FIRMWARE
Adapter firmware updates are persistent.
.Pp
Firmware can be updated by following the steps below:
.Bl -enum
.It
Copy the below code to a Makefile:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
KMOD=elxflash
FIRMWS=imagename.ufi:elxflash
\&.include <bsd.kmod.mk>
.Ed
.It
Replace imagename in above with UFI file name
.It
Copy Makefile and UFI file to a directory
.It
Execute make & copy generated elxflash.ko to
.Pa /lib/modules
.It
sysctl dev.oce.<if_id>.fw_upgrade=elxflash
.It
Reboot the machine
.El
.Pp
In case of issues with supplied UFI, flashing fails with one
of the following errors.
.Pp
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
.Qq Invalid BE3 firmware image
.It
.Qq "Invalid Cookie. Firmware image corrupted ?"
.It
.Qq cmd to write to flash rom failed.
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Emulex website at:
.Pa http://www.Emulex.com/
or E-Mail at
.Pa freebsd-drivers@emulex.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An freebsd-drivers@emulex.com .
