.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Broadcom. All rights reserved.
.\" The term "Broadcom" refers to Broadcom Limited and/or its subsidiaries.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"    and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 30, 2018
.Dt OCS_FC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ocs_fc
.Nd "Device driver for Emulex Fibre Channel Host Adapters"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, add this line to the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ocs_fc"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot, add this line to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ocs_fc_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides access to Fibre Channel SCSI devices.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports initiator and target modes.
Support is available for Arbitrated loops, Point-to-Point,
and Fabric connections.
FC-Tape is highly recommended for connections to tape drives that support
it.
FC-Tape includes four elements from the T-10 FCP-4 specification:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Precise Delivery of Commands
.It
Confirmed Completion of FCP I/O Operations
.It
Retransmission of Unsuccessfully Transmitted IUs
.It
Task Retry Identification
.El
.Pp
Together these features allow for link level error recovery with tape
devices.
Without link level error recovery, an initiator cannot, for instance, tell whether a tape write
command that has timed out resulted in all, part, or none of the data going to
the tape drive.
FC-Tape is automatically enabled when both the controller and target support it.

.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports these Fibre Channel adapters:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxx -offset indent
.It Emulex 16/8G FC GEN 5 HBAS
.Bd -literal -offset indent
LPe15004 FC Host Bus Adapters
LPe160XX FC Host Bus Adapters
.Ed
.It Emulex 32/16G FC GEN 6 HBAS
.Bd -literal -offset indent
LPe3100X FC Host Bus Adapters
LPe3200X FC Host Bus Adapters
.Ed
.El
.Sh UPDATING FIRMWARE
Adapter firmware updates are persistent.
.Pp
Firmware can be updated by following these steps:
.Bl -enum
.It
Copy this code to a
.Pa Makefile :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
KMOD=ocsflash
FIRMWS=imagename.grp:ocsflash
\&.include <bsd.kmod.mk>
.Ed
.It
Replace
.Pa imagename
with the name of the GRP file.
.It
Copy the
.Pa Makefile
and GRP file to a local directory
.It
Execute
.Cm make
and copy the generated
.Pa ocsflash.ko
file to
.Pa /lib/modules
.It
.Cm sysctl dev.ocs_fc.<N>.fw_upgrade=ocsflash
.It
Check kernel messages regarding status of the operation
.It
Reboot the machine
.El
.Pp
.Sh BOOT OPTIONS
Options are controlled by setting values in
.Pa /boot/device.hints .
.Pp
They are:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hint.ocs_fc.N.initiator
Enable initiator functionality.
Default 1 (enabled), 0 to disable.
.It Va hint.ocs_fc.N.target
Enable target functionality.
Default 1 (enabled), 0 to disable.
.It Va hint.ocs_fc.N.topology
Topology: 0 for Auto, 1 for NPort only, 2 for Loop only.
.It Va hint.ocs_fc.N.speed
Link speed in megabits per second.
Possible values include:
0 Auto-speed negotiation (default), 4000 (4GFC), 8000 (8GFC), 16000 (16GFC).
.El
.Sh SYSCTL OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.port_state
Port state (read/write).
Valid values are
.Li online
and
.Li offline .
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.wwpn
World Wide Port Name (read/write).
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.wwnn
World Wide Node Name (read/write).
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.fwrev
Firmware revision (read-only).
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.sn
Adapter serial number (read-only).
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.configured_speed
Configured Port Speed (read/write).
Valid values are:
0 Auto-speed negotiation (default), 4000 (4GFC), 8000 (8GFC), 16000 (16GFC).
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.configured_topology
Configured Port Topology (read/write).
Valid values are:
0-Auto; 1-NPort; 2-Loop.
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.current_speed
Current Port Speed (read-only).
.It Va dev.ocs_fc.N.current_topology
Current Port Topology (read-only).
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Broadcom website at:
.Pa http://www.broadcom.com/
or E-Mail at
.Pa ocs-driver-team.pdl@broadcom.com.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Broadcom.
