.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 M. Warner Losh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 20, 2015
.Dt OWC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm owc
.Nd Dallas Semiconductor 1-Wire Controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device owc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module implements Dallas Semiconductor 1-Wire signaling.
It attaches the
.Xr ow 4
driver 1-Wire bus protocol.
The
.Nm
device implements the Link Layer of the 1-Wire bus protocol stack.
.Pp
Bit banging a pin on a
.Xr gpiobus 4
is the only supported controller.
Both standard and overdrive transfer timings are implemented.
Strong pull-up functionality needed to support parasitic mode is not
implemented.
.Pp
To enable 1-Wire for FDT systems requires modifying the DTS for your
board to add something like:
.Bd -literal
/ {
	...
	onewire {
		compatible = "w1-gpio";
		gpios = <&gpio 4 1>;
	};
	...
};
.Ed
.Pp
The gpios property describes the GPIO pin the 1-Wire bus is connected
to.
For more details about the
.Va gpios
property, please consult
.Pa /usr/src/sys/dts/bindings-gpio.txt .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpiobus 4 ,
.Xr ow 4 ,
.Xr ow_temp 4 ,
.Xr owll 9 ,
.Xr own 9
.Sh LEGAL
.Tn 1-Wire
is a registered trademark of Maxim Integrated Products, Inc.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver and this manual page were written by
.An Warner Losh .
.Sh CAVEATS
The gpio driver implements timing by busy waiting, which can cause a
high load on slower systems.
.Sh BUGS
Overdrive mode has not actually been tested.
