.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Christian Brueffer
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 8, 2010
.Dt PADLOCK 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm padlock
.Nd "driver for the cryptographic functions and RNG in VIA C3, C7 and Eden processors"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device crypto"
.Cd "device padlock"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
padlock_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The C3 and Eden processor series from VIA include hardware acceleration for
AES.
The C7 series includes hardware acceleration for AES, SHA1, SHA256 and RSA.
All of the above processor series include a hardware random number generator.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver registers itself to accelerate AES operations and, if available, HMAC/SHA1
and HMAC/SHA256 for
.Xr crypto 4 .
It also registers itself to accelerate other HMAC algorithms, although
there is no hardware acceleration for those algorithms.
This is only needed so
.Nm
can work with
.Xr ipsec 4 .
.Pp
The hardware random number generator supplies data for the kernel
.Xr random 4
subsystem.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypt 3 ,
.Xr crypto 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr random 4 ,
.Xr crypto 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox .
The first
.Fx
release to include it was
.Fx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver with AES encryption support was written by
.An Jason Wright Aq Mt jason@OpenBSD.org .
It was ported to
.Fx
and then extended to support SHA1 and SHA256
by
.An Pawel Jakub Dawidek Aq Mt pjd@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Christian Brueffer Aq Mt brueffer@FreeBSD.org .
