.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 Kenneth D. Merry.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 3, 2017
.Dt PASS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pass
.Nd CAM application passthrough driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device pass
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides a way for userland applications to issue CAM CCBs to the
kernel.
.Pp
Since the
.Nm
driver allows direct access to the CAM subsystem, system administrators
should exercise caution when granting access to this driver.
If used
improperly, this driver can allow userland applications to crash a machine
or cause data loss.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver attaches to every
.Tn SCSI
and
.Tn ATA
device found in the system.
Since it attaches to every device, it provides a generic means of accessing
.Tn SCSI
and
.Tn ATA
devices, and allows the user to access devices which have no
"standard" peripheral driver associated with them.
.Sh KERNEL CONFIGURATION
It is only necessary to configure one
.Nm
device in the kernel;
.Nm
devices are automatically allocated as
.Tn SCSI
and
.Tn ATA
devices are found.
.Sh IOCTLS
.Bl -tag -width 5n
.It CAMIOCOMMAND union ccb *
This ioctl takes most kinds of CAM CCBs and passes them through to the CAM
transport layer for action.
Note that some CCB types are not allowed
through the passthrough device, and must be sent through the
.Xr xpt 4
device instead.
Some examples of xpt-only CCBs are XPT_SCAN_BUS,
XPT_DEV_MATCH, XPT_RESET_BUS, XPT_SCAN_LUN, XPT_ENG_INQ, and XPT_ENG_EXEC.
These CCB types have various attributes that make it illogical or
impossible to service them through the passthrough interface.
.Pp
If the user would like the kernel to do error recovery, the
.Dv CAM_PASS_ERR_RECOVER
flag must be set on the CCB, and the retry_count field set to the number
of retries.
.It CAMGETPASSTHRU union ccb *
This ioctl takes an XPT_GDEVLIST CCB, and returns the passthrough device
corresponding to the device in question.
Although this ioctl is available through the
.Nm
driver, it is of limited use, since the caller must already know that
the device in question is a passthrough device if they are issuing this
ioctl.
It is probably more useful to issue this ioctl through the
.Xr xpt 4
device.
.It CAMIOQUEUE union ccb *
Queue a CCB to the
.Nm
driver to be executed asynchronously.
The caller may use
.Xr select 2 ,
.Xr poll 2
or
.Xr kevent 2
to receive notification when the CCB has completed.
.Pp
This ioctl takes most CAM CCBs, but some CCB types are not allowed through
the pass device, and must be sent through the
.Xr xpt 4
device instead.
Some examples of xpt-only CCBs are XPT_SCAN_BUS,
XPT_DEV_MATCH, XPT_RESET_BUS, XPT_SCAN_LUN, XPT_ENG_INQ, and XPT_ENG_EXEC.
These CCB types have various attributes that make it illogical or
impossible to service them through the passthrough interface.
.Pp
Although the
.Dv CAMIOQUEUE
ioctl is not defined to take an argument, it does require a
pointer to a union ccb.
It is not defined to take an argument to avoid an extra malloc and copy
inside the generic
.Xr ioctl 2
handler.
.Pp
The completed CCB will be returned via the
.Dv CAMIOGET
ioctl.
An error will only be returned from the
.Dv CAMIOQUEUE
ioctl if there is an error allocating memory for the request or copying
memory from userland.
All other errors will be reported as standard CAM CCB status errors.
Since the CCB is not copied back to the user process from the pass driver
in the
.Dv CAMIOQUEUE
ioctl, the user's passed-in CCB will not be modfied.
This is the case even with immediate CCBs.
Instead, the completed CCB must be retrieved via the
.Dv CAMIOGET
ioctl and the status examined.
.Pp
Multiple CCBs may be queued via the
.Dv CAMIOQUEUE
ioctl at any given time, and they may complete in a different order than
the order that they were submitted.
The caller must take steps to identify CCBs that are queued and completed.
The
.Dv periph_priv
structure inside struct ccb_hdr is available for userland use with the
.Dv CAMIOQUEUE
and
.Dv CAMIOGET
ioctls, and will be preserved across calls.
Also, the periph_links linked list pointers inside struct ccb_hdr are
available for userland use with the
.Dv CAMIOQUEUE
and
.Dv CAMIOGET
ioctls and will be preserved across calls.
.Pp
If the user would like the kernel to do error recovery, the
.Dv CAM_PASS_ERR_RECOVER
flag must be set on the CCB, and the retry_count field set to the number
of retries.
.It CAMIOGET union ccb *
Retrieve completed CAM CCBs queued via the
.Dv CAMIOQUEUE
ioctl.
An error will only be returned from the
.Dv CAMIOGET
ioctl if the
.Nm
driver fails to copy data to the user process or if there are no completed
CCBs available to retrieve.
If no CCBs are available to retrieve,
errno will be set to
.Dv ENOENT .
.Pp
All other errors will be reported as standard CAM CCB status errors.
.Pp
Although the
.Dv CAMIOGET
ioctl is not defined to take an argument, it does require a
pointer to a union ccb.
It is not defined to take an argument to avoid an extra malloc and copy
inside the generic
.Xr ioctl 2
handler.
.Pp
The pass driver will report via
.Xr select 2 ,
.Xr poll 2
or
.Xr kevent 2
when a CCB has completed.
One CCB may be retrieved per
.Dv CAMIOGET
call.
CCBs may be returned in an order different than the order they were
submitted.
So the caller should use the
.Dv periph_priv
area inside the CCB header to store pointers to identifying information.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/passn -compact
.It Pa /dev/pass Ns Ar n
Character device nodes for the
.Nm
driver.
There should be one of these for each device accessed through the
CAM subsystem.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
None.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kqueue 2 ,
.Xr poll 2 ,
.Xr select 2 ,
.Xr cam 3 ,
.Xr cam_cdbparse 3 ,
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ctl 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr xpt 4 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8 ,
.Xr camdd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The CAM passthrough driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Kenneth Merry Aq Mt ken@FreeBSD.org
