.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 M. Warner Losh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 9, 2002
.Dt PCCARD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pccard
.Nd PC Card bus driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device pccard
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver implements the PC Card bus.
The
.Nm
driver supports all PC Card bridges in the system.
.Sh TUNABLES
The driver supports the following tunable parameters, which may be
added to
.Pa /boot/loader.conf
or set via the
.Xr sysctl 8
command:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm hw.pccard.cis_debug" -compact
.It Cm hw.pccard.debug
Non-zero values cause more verbose information to be printed when a
16-bit PC Card is inserted or removed.
.It Cm hw.pccard.cis_debug
Non-zero value causes the CIS parsing of the 16-bit PC Card to be much
more verbose and include a complete CIS dump.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/pccard0.cis" -compact
.It Pa /dev/pccard0.cis
This exclusive-use device will report all the CIS chains present in a
PC Card, if a 16-bit PC Card is inserted in the slot.
Only one user at a time may access the CIS.
The CIS is presented as the relevant byte stream from the PC Card.
For CIS tuples in Attribute Memory (the default), only the even
locations are presented (the ODD locations are undefined per the
standard).
For CIS tuples in Common Memory, every byte is presented to the user.
Decoding of the CIS tuples is done via a userland program.
All tuples are presented to the user.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cardbus 4 ,
.\" .Xr mecia 4 ,
.Xr pccbb 4
.\" .Xr tcic 4
.Rs
.%T "PC Card Standard, Release 8"
.Re
