.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2002 M. Warner Losh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 9, 2002
.Dt PCIC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pcic
.Nd PC Card bridge driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device pcic
.Cd device pccard
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for older ISA and non-Yenta PCI PC Card bridges.
The
.Nm
driver supports most
.Tn ExCA
devices attached to the
.Tn ISA
bus or
.Tn PCI
devices that do not conform to the Yenta specification.
.Pp
The following
.Tn ISA
devices, or true clones, are supported in the current code.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "Intel i82365SL Step A" -compact
.It Intel i82365SL Step A
.It Intel i82365SL Step B
.It Intel i82365SL Step C
.Tn Intel Ns 's
original 16-bit PC Card controller.
.It Intel i82365SL-DF
.Tn Intel Ns 's
last version of this device.
3.3V support was added.
.It VLSI 82C146
An older VLSI part with some issues on some machines.
.It Cirrus Logic PD-6710
.It Cirrus Logic PD-6720
.It Cirrus Logic PD-6722
Cirrus Logic's pcic controller.
Compatible with the i82365SL Step C with the addition of a different
3.3V control.
.It Ricoh RF5C296
.It Ricoh RF5C396
Ricoh's PC Card bridge chips.
These are compatible with the i82365SL Step C, but with yet another
different 3.3V control.
.It Vadem 365
.It Vadem 465
Compatible with i82365SL Step C.
.It Vadem 468
.It Vadem 469
Like the earlier Vadem models, but with Vadem's own, incompatible, 3.3V
control system.
.It IBM PCIC
.Tn IBM
clone of the original i82365SL part, with its own ID register value.
Has no 3.3V ability.
.El
.Pp
Many other vendors made parts in this arena, but most of them were
compatible with one of the above chipsets.
.Pp
The following PCI pcmcia bridges are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "Intel i82365SL Step A" -compact
.It Cirrus Logic PD6729
.It Cirrus Logic PD6730
.Pp
.It O2micro OZ6729
.It O2micro OZ6730
.El
.Sh BUGS
This does not work at all at the moment.
