.\" $OpenBSD: pckbc.4,v 1.19 2025/02/10 11:41:19 miod Exp $
.\" $NetBSD: pckbc.4,v 1.2 2000/06/16 06:42:31 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999
.\" 	Matthias Drochner.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 10 2025 $
.Dt PCKBC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pckbc
.Nd PC (ISA) keyboard controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pckbc* at isa? flags 0x00           " Pq "alpha, amd64, i386, loongson"
.Cd "pckbc* at acpi? flags 0x00          " Pq "amd64"
.Cd "pckbc* at ebus?                     " Pq "sparc64"
.Cd "pckbd* at pckbc?"
.Cd "pms*   at pckbc?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver handles resource allocation and device attachment for the
traditional PC/AT keyboard controller, or emulations thereof.
It provides up to two logical connections for child devices, the
.Dq keyboard
slot for a keyboard and the
.Dq auxiliary
slot for mice (the latter might be missing in older keyboard controllers,
or recent emulations).
.Pp
To avoid attaching a phantom PS/2 keyboard device, the
.Xr isa 4
attachment of the
.Nm
driver will attempt to detect USB legacy keyboard emulation on amd64 and i386
systems.
Unfortunately, the detection heuristics may fail on older systems with a real
PS/2 keyboard.
The keyboard can be forced to attach on these systems, by changing the
device flags to 1.
.Pp
The
.Xr acpi 4
attachment of the
.Nm
driver defaults to attach only where it would perform better than its legacy
.Xr isa 4
attachment.
Should this logic be insufficient, it is possible to force it to always attach,
by changing its device flags to 1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr ebus 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr pckbd 4 ,
.Xr pms 4 ,
.Xr boot_config 8
