.\"	$OpenBSD: pgt.4,v 1.47 2022/01/05 17:39:25 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Theo de Raadt.
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 5 2022 $
.Dt PGT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pgt
.Nd Conexant/Intersil Prism GT Full-MAC IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pgt* at cardbus?"
.Cd "pgt* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Conexant/Intersil GT-series devices
which can support the Full-MAC firmware, using the ISL3877,
ISL3880, and ISL3890 chips.
The
.Nm
driver will not (yet) work on similar devices using the ISL3886 or
similar chips which use the Soft-MAC firmware.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It IBSS mode
Also known as
.Em IEEE ad-hoc
mode or
.Em peer-to-peer
mode.
This is the standardized method of operating without an access point.
Stations associate with a service set.
However, actual connections between stations are peer-to-peer.
.It Host AP
In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
for other cards.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use hardware
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP).
It is strongly recommended that WEP
not be used as the sole mechanism
to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses in it.
.Pp
In BSS mode,
the driver supports powersave mode,
which can be enabled via
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The driver needs a set of firmware files which are loaded when
an interface is brought up:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/pgt-isl3877
.It Pa /etc/firmware/pgt-isl3890
.El
.Pp
These firmware files are not free because Conexant refuses
to grant distribution rights.
In fact they have rebuffed thousands
of attempts to start a dialogue on this issue.
As a result, even though
.Ox
includes the driver, the firmware files cannot be included and
users have to download these files on their own.
.Pp
A prepackaged version of the firmware can be installed using
.Xr fw_update 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The following cards are among those supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Bl -column "NETGEAR WG511 (Taiwanese, not Chinese)" "ISL3880" "CardBus" -offset 6n
.It Em Card Ta Em Chip Ta Em Bus
.It "3COM 3CRWE154G72" Ta ISL3880 Ta CardBus
.It "D-Link DWL-g650 A1" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "I-O Data WN-G54/CB" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "I4 Z-Com XG-600" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "I4 Z-Com XG-900" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "Intersil PRISM Indigo" Ta ISL3877 Ta PCI
.It "Intersil PRISM Duette" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "NETGEAR WG511 (Taiwanese, not Chinese)" Ta ISL3890 Ta CardBus
.It "PLANEX GW-DS54G" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "SMC EZ Connect g 2.4GHz SMC2802W" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "SMC EZ Connect g 2.4GHz SMC2835W-v2" Ta ISL3890 Ta CardBus
.It "SMC 2802Wv2" Ta ISL3890 Ta PCI
.It "Soyo Aerielink" Ta ISL3890 Ta CardBus
.It "ZyXEL ZyAIR G-100" Ta ISL3890 Ta CardBus
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig pgt0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures pgt0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WEP key
.Dq mywepkey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nwid mynwid nwkey mywepkey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example creates a host-based access point on boot:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mediaopt hostap
nwid mynwid nwkey mywepkey
inet 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cardbus 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written for
.Fx
by
.An Brian Fundakowski ,
and then rewritten for
.Ox
by
.An Marcus Glocker
and
.An Claudio Jeker .
.Sh CAVEATS
Host AP mode doesn't support power saving.
Clients attempting to use power saving mode may experience significant
packet loss (disabling power saving on the client will fix this).
