.\"	$OpenBSD: pppoe.4,v 1.36 2022/05/27 15:45:02 jmc Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: pppoe.4,v 1.26 2003/10/02 07:06:36 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Martin Husemann <martin@NetBSD.org>.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 27 2022 $
.Dt PPPOE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pppoe
.Nd PPP Over Ethernet protocol network interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device pppoe"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface encapsulates
.Em Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)
packets inside Ethernet frames as defined by RFC 2516.
.Pp
This is often used to connect a router via a DSL modem to
an access concentrator.
The
.Nm
interface does not by itself transmit or receive frames,
but needs an Ethernet interface to do so.
This Ethernet interface is connected to the
.Nm
interface via
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
The Ethernet interface needs to be marked UP, but does not need to have an
IP address.
.Pp
There are two basic modes of operation, controlled via the
.Em link1
switch.
The default mode,
.Em link1
not being set, tries to keep the configured session open all the
time.
If the session is disconnected, a new connection attempt is started
immediately.
The
.Dq dial on demand
mode, selected by setting
.Em link1 ,
only establishes a connection when data is being sent to the interface.
.Pp
Before a
.Nm
interface is usable, it needs to be configured.
The following steps are necessary:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Create the interface.
.It
Connect an Ethernet interface.
This interface is used for the physical communication.
As noted above it must be marked UP, but need not have an IP address.
.It
Configure authentication.
The PPP session needs to identify the client to the peer.
For more details on the available options see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.It
If using IPv6, configure a link-local address.
.El
.Pp
This all is typically accomplished using an
.Pa /etc/hostname.pppoe0
file.
A typical file looks like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
inet 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255 NONE \e
	pppoedev em0 authproto pap \e
	authname 'testcaller' authkey 'donttell' up
dest 0.0.0.1
inet6 eui64
!/sbin/route add default -ifp pppoe0 0.0.0.1
!/sbin/route add -inet6 default -ifp pppoe0 fe80::%pppoe0
.Ed
.Pp
The physical interface must also be marked
.Ql up :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "up" > /etc/hostname.em0
.Ed
.Pp
Since this is a PPP interface, the addresses assigned to the interface
may change during PPP negotiation.
In the above example, 0.0.0.0 and 0.0.0.1 serve as placeholders for
dynamic address configuration.
.Pp
If the local address is set to wildcard address 0.0.0.0, it will
be changed to an address suggested by the peer.
.Pp
If the destination address is set to a wildcard address in the range
from 0.0.0.1 to 0.0.0.255, it will be changed to an address suggested
by the peer, and if a default route which uses this interface exists
the gateway will be changed to the suggested address as well.
.Pp
Otherwise, PPP negotiation will only agree to exactly the IPv4 addresses
which are configured on the interface.
.Sh KERNEL OPTIONS
.Nm
does not interfere with other PPPoE implementations
running on the same machine.
However under some circumstances
(such as after a crash or power failure)
the peer device might initially refuse to
reestablish a new PPPoE connection
because there is already an open session.
This would be indicated by the client sending a high number of PADI packets
before successfully connecting.
The
.Nm
driver can be told to kill all unknown PPPoE sessions
by sending a PADT packet to explicitly terminate the old session.
Add the following to the kernel config file:
.Pp
.Dl option PPPOE_TERM_UNKNOWN_SESSIONS
.Sh PPPOE AND MTU/MSS
PPPoE has an 8-byte header.
When run over a network interface with the
standard Ethernet maximum transmission unit (MTU) of 1500 bytes,
this reduces the maximum available MTU to 1492.
.Nm
sets the default MTU to this value.
Unfortunately issues can occur when the path between
the two endpoints of a TCP connection are not able to carry
same sized packets,
leading to possible packet fragmentation and sometimes packet loss.
In that case the maximum packet size can be set using the
.Cm max-mss
option in
.Xr pf.conf 5 .
For example:
.Pp
.Dl match on pppoe0 scrub (max-mss 1440)
.Sh MTU/MSS NEGOTIATION
When using a PPPoE device configured for a higher MTU ("jumbo frames"),
the MTU for the
.Nm
device can also be raised.
In this case
.Nm
attempts to negotiate the higher size with the other PPPoE endpoint
using the RFC 4638 protocol.
This can allow standard Ethernet packet sizes (1500 bytes)
to be carried over PPPoE.
For example, in
.Pa /etc/hostname.pppoe0 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
inet 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255 NONE mtu 1500 \e
	pppoedev em0 authproto pap \e
	authname 'testcaller' authkey 'donttell' up
dest 0.0.0.1
!/sbin/route add default -ifp pppoe0 0.0.0.1
.Ed
.Pp
The physical interface would also have to be configured correspondingly:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "up mtu 1508" > /etc/hostname.em0
.Ed
.Pp
However, RFC 4638 negotiation only takes into account the MTU configured
on the endpoints, not the maximum MTU supported on the path between them.
If the path cannot pass the larger Ethernet frames, negotiation will succeed
but the larger frames will be dropped.
For this reason it is important to test the connection with large packets
when enabling a higher MTU.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sppp 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr pf.conf 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A L. Mamakos
.%A K. Lidl
.%A J. Evarts
.%A D. Carrel
.%A D. Simone
.%A R. Wheeler
.%D February 1999
.%R RFC 2516
.%T A Method for Transmitting PPP Over Ethernet (PPPoE)
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A P. Arberg
.%A D. Kourkouzelis
.%A M. Duckett
.%A T. Anschutz
.%A J. Moisand
.%D September 2006
.%R RFC 4638
.%T Accommodating a Maximum Transit Unit/Maximum Receive Unit (MTU/MRU) Greater Than 1492 in the Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet (PPPoE)
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device first appeared in
.Ox 3.7 .
.Sh BUGS
This implementation is client side only.
.Pp
It is important to specify
.Dq Li netmask 255.255.255.255
to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
If the netmask is unspecified, it will be set to 8 when 0.0.0.0 is
configured to the interface, and it will persist after negotiation.
.Pp
The presence of a
.Xr mygate 5
file will interfere with the routing table.
Make sure this file is either empty or does not exist.
.Pp
Two
.Nm
interfaces configured with the same wildcard destination address
cannot share a routing table.
