.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Cavium Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 9, 2017
.Dt QLNXE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm qlnxe
.Nd "Cavium 25/40/100 Gigabit Ethernet & CNA Adapter Driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device qlnxe"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_qlnxe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports IPv4 checksum offload,
TCP and UDP checksum offload for both IPv4 and IPv6,
Large Segment Offload for both IPv4 and IPv6,
Jumbo frames, VLAN Tag, Receive Side scaling, HW and Soft LRO.
For further hardware information, see
.Pa http://www.qlogic.com/ .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports 25/40/100 Gigabit Ethernet & CNA Adapter based on the following
chipsets:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
QLogic 45000 series
.It
QLogic 41000 series
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For support questions please contact your Cavium approved reseller or
Cavium Technical Support at
.Pa http://support.qlogic.com ,
or by E-mail at
.Aq Mt support@qlogic.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An David C Somayajulu
at Cavium Inc.
