.\" $OpenBSD: qwx.4,v 1.9 2025/08/04 17:57:28 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Martin Pieuchot <mpi@openbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 Stefan Sperling <stsp@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 4 2025 $
.Dt QWX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm qwx
.Nd Qualcomm IEEE 802.11a/ac/ax/b/g/n wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "qwx* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Qualcomm Technologies QCNFA765
802.11ax devices.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
The
.Nm
driver offloads both encryption and decryption of unicast data frames to the
hardware for the CCMP cipher.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The driver needs the following firmware files,
which are loaded when an interface is brought up:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.0-amss
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.0-board-2
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.0-m3
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.0-regdb
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.1-amss
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.1-board-2
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.1-m3
.It Pa /etc/firmware/qwx-wcn6855-hw2.1-regdb
.El
.Pp
These firmware files are not free because Qualcomm refuses to grant
distribution rights without contractual obligations.
As a result, even though
.Ox
includes the driver, the firmware files cannot be included and
users have to download these files on their own.
.Pp
A prepackaged version of the firmware can be installed using
.Xr fw_update 8 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig qwx0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures qwx0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
join mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 7.5 .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver does not support any of the 802.11ac and 802.11ax
capabilities offered by the hardware.
.Sh BUGS
Broadcast and Multicast frames are only received on networks which
do not use encryption or which use WPA.
This prevents ARP and IPv6 from working correctly on networks which
use WEP encryption.
