.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 18, 2005
.Dt RC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc
.Nd RISCom/8 multiport card
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device isa
.Cd device rc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Tn RISCom/8
is an eight port
.Tn ISA
.Tn RS-232C
communications multiplexer with a built in
.Tn RISC
processor.
It uses a block of sixteen
.Tn I/O
ports in the range 0x200 to 0x3f0 selectable by on-board
switches or jumpers.
The block must be aligned on a sixteen port boundary.
The jumper-selectable hardware interrupt level may be set to
be detected during system
initialization using settings found in the
.Pa /boot/device.hints
file.
.Pp
This driver is mostly based on the Cirrus Logic CL-CD180 driver.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn SDL
Communications
.Tn RISCom/8
boards.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following driver specific error messages
may be reported:
.Bl -diag
.It "rc%d channel%d: interrupt-level buffer overflow"
An internal buffer overflow error has occurred on
the listed channel.
The
.Nm
driver will need to be reloaded to correct this.
.It "rc%d: Bad char chan %d"
The channel has obtained a bad set of characters.
.It "rc%d: Got extra chars chan %d"
The
.Nm
driver got more characters than expected on the channel shown.
.It "rc%d: data mismatch chan %d ptr %d (%d != %d)"
Data sent from channel
.Ar %d
to the rx buffer was different then expected.
.It "rc%d: channel %d command timeout, rc.c line: %d"
A command timeout has occurred on the channel, the
.Pa src/sys/dev/rc/rc.c
file can be consulted for more information.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 1 ,
.Xr ttyname 3 ,
.Xr sio 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr device.hints 5 ,
.Xr comcontrol 8 ,
.Xr getty 8 ,
.Xr mutex 9 ,
.Xr splx 9
.Pp
.Pa http://www.sdlcomm.com
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.0.5 .
This manual page first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver code still uses the
.Xr spl 9
functions.
These should be replaced by
.Xr mutex 9
functions.
.Pp
The various
.Fn ttyld_*
functions should be documented.
