.\" Copyright (c) 2015, Rubicon Communications, LLC (Netgate)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2015
.Dt RCCGPIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rccgpio
.Nd ADI Engineering RCC-VE and RCC-DFF/DFFv2 GPIO controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device rccgpio"
.Cd "device gpio"
.Cd "device gpioled"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
provides a simple interface to read the reset switch state and control the
status LEDs.
.Pp
The software controlled reset switch is known to be available on boards from
Netgate.
Most people get a button that is a hardware reset.
.Pp
All the GPIO pins are locked in their intended setup to disallow any harmful
settings (the ones that can cause short circuits).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpio 3 ,
.Xr gpio 4 ,
.Xr gpioled 4 ,
.Xr gpioctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Luiz Otavio O Souza Aq Mt loos@FreeBSD.org .
