.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Edward Tomasz Napierala
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd May 28, 2017
.Dt RCTL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rctl
.Nd resource limits
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options RACCT"
.Cd "options RCTL"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
subsystem provides a flexible resource limits mechanism,
controlled by a set of rules that can be added or removed at runtime
using the
.Xr rctl 8
management utility.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt, or
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va kern.racct.enable: No 1
Enable
.Nm .
This defaults to 1, unless
.Cd "options RACCT_DEFAULT_TO_DISABLED"
is set in the kernel configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr rctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
subsystem first appeared in
.Fx 9.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
subsystem was developed by
.An Edward Tomasz Napierala Aq Mt trasz@FreeBSD.org
under sponsorship from the FreeBSD Foundation.
