.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Marius Strobl <marius@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 16, 2011
.Dt RGEPHY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rgephy
.Nd RealTek RTL8168/8169/8110/8211 series 10/100/1000 Gigabit Ethernet PHY driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile all available PHY drivers into the kernel,
place the following line in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to selectively compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your kernel configuration file instead:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device mii"
.Cd "device rgephy"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the RealTek RTL8168, RTL8169, RTL8110 and RTL8211 series
integrated 10/100/1000 Gigabit Ethernet PHYs.
.Pp
In order to get a list of media types and options supported by a specific
instance of the
.Nm
driver, run
.Li ifconfig -m
on the instance of its parent MAC driver.
.Pp
Additionally,
the
.Nm
driver supports the following special media option:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm flag0"
.It Cm flag0
When manually setting media type and options via
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
the
.Nm
driver by default also triggers an autonegotiation advertising the selected
media.
This is done in order to work around hardware issues in certain scenarios.
It is believed that this behavior does not cause harm in general but in fact
can have an adverse effect in edge cases.
In order to manually set the media type and options without also triggering
an autonegotiation,
the
.Nm
driver allows to turn this behavior off via the
.Cm flag0
media option.
.El
.Pp
Note that this special media option will not show up in the output of
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
even when set.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Manually set 100BASE-TX full-duplex without also triggering an
autonegotiation:
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig re0 media 100baseTX mediaopt full-duplex,flag0"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.\".Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
