.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 11, 2003
.Dt RNDTEST 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rndtest
.Nd FIPS 140-2 random number generator test monitor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device rndtest"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver
.Dq "hooks up"
to hardware crypto devices to monitor the
entropy data passed to the
.Xr random 4
subsystem.
This data is periodically tested for FIPS 140-2 compliance and
statistics are collected.
If the harvested entropy fails any of the FIPS test suite, then
it is discarded and testing is continuously applied until
.Dq "good data"
is received from the device.
Failures are optionally reported on the console.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypto 4 ,
.Xr hifn 4 ,
.Xr random 4 ,
.Xr safe 4 ,
.Xr ubsec 4 ,
.Xr crypto 9
.Sh HISTORY
The idea for this and the original code came from
.An "Jason L. Wright" .
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh BUGS
Crypto device drivers must be compiled specially to make use of this driver;
this should not be necessary.
This feature might better be integrated into the
.Xr random 4
subsystem where it can be applied to devices that claim to supply
.Dq "pure entropy" .
