.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Comtrol, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd November 15, 1995
.Dt RP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rp
.Nd "driver for Comtrol RocketPort Intelligent Serial Port Cards"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device rp"
.Pp
For ISA cards, you must specify the port address in
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.rp.0.at="isa"
.Cd hint.rp.0.port="0x100"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides a kernel device driver for the
.Tn RocketPort
and
.Tn RocketPort RA
serial boards.
These boards provide 8, 16, or 32 high-speed serial ports
while requiring only 68 bytes of I/O space for all 8, 16,
or 32 ports, and do not require an interrupt channel.
This driver supports up to four
.Tn RocketPort
or
.Tn RocketPort RA
boards in one machine simultaneously.
If you are using four 32 port
.Tn RocketPort
boards, you can put as many as 128 intelligent serial ports
on your system.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following speeds: 50, 75, 110, 134, 150,
200, 300, 600, 1200, 1800, 2400, 4800, 9600, 19200, 38400, 7200,
14400, 57600, 76800, 115200, and 230400.
(You must use
.Xr termios 4 ,
rather than the old style ioctl interface to use non-traditional
speeds.)
.Pp
An open on the
.Nm
driver will block until carrier is present, unless
.Dv O_NONBLOCK
or
.Dv CLOCAL
is set.
.Sh HARDWARE CONFIGURATION
The first
.Tn RocketPort
or
.Tn RocketPort RA
card requires a 68-byte contiguous block of I/O addresses,
starting at one of the following:
0x100h, 0x140h, 0x180h, 0x200h, 0x240h, 0x280h, 0x300h, 0x340h,
0x380h.
The second, third, and fourth
.Tn RocketPort
cards require only a
64-byte contiguous block of I/O addresses, starting at one of the
above address ranges.
The I/O address range used by any of the
.Tn RocketPort
cards must not conflict with any other cards in the system,
including other
.Tn RocketPort
cards.
The starting range of the I/O ports used by each card
must match with the I/O address specified in
.Pa /boot/device.hints .
.Pp
Since the first
.Tn RocketPort
uses 68 I/O addresses, if the first card is
set to use an I/O block starting at 0x100,
it will occupy the I/O ports between 0x100 and 0x143.
This means that the second, third, or fourth
.Tn RocketPort
board may not use the block of addresses starting at 0x140,
since the first three I/O addresses of that range
are used by the first board.
This is an important point to keep in mind.
.Pp
If you have two ISA cards, one installed at 0x100 and the
second installed at 0x180, then you should add the following to
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Pp
.Dl hint.rp.0.at="isa"
.Dl hint.rp.0.port="0x100"
.Dl hint.rp.1.at="isa"
.Dl hint.rp.1.port="0x180"
.Pp
The configuration of the
.Tn RocketPort
cards is done via the set of 8 DIP switches,
labeled SW1 on the
.Tn RocketPort
card:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
+-------------------------------+
| 8 | 7 | 6 | 5 | 4 | 3 | 2 | 1 |
+-------+-------+---------------+
| Unused| Card  | I/O Port Block|
+-------------------------------+
.Ed
.Pp
DIP switches 7 and 8 are unused, and must be left on.
.Pp
DIP switches 6 and 5 identify the card number of each
.Tn RocketPort
card.
The first card installed in the system must have its DIP switches set
as card number one; the second card installed in the system must have
its DIP switches set as card number two; and so on.
As shipped from
the factory, DIP switches 6 and 5 are both on by default, indicating
that this is the first card installed on the system:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
DIP Switches
6    5
===================
On   On   First Card
On   Off  Second Card
Off  On   Third Card
Off  Off  Fourth Card
.Ed
.Pp
DIP switches 4, 3, 2, and 1 indicate the I/O address range used by the
first
.Tn RocketPort
card.
If there are more than one
.Tn RocketPort
cards installed in a system,
the second, third and fourth
.Tn RocketPort
cards must
also be set to the I/O address range used by the first
.Tn RocketPort
card;
all cards must have these DIP switches set identically
for proper operation.
As shipped from the factory, DIP switch 4 is on,
and switches 3, 2, and 1 are off by default,
indicating an I/O address range used by the first
card which starts at 0x180 and extends to 0x1C3.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
DIP Switches         I/O Address Range
4    3    2    1     Used by the First Card
=====================================
On   Off  On   Off   100-143
On   Off  Off  On    140-183
On   Off  Off  Off   180-1C3
Off  On   On   Off   200-243
Off  On   Off  On    240-283
Off  On   Off  Off   280-2C3
Off  Off  On   Off   300-343
Off  Off  Off  On    340-383
Off  Off  Off  Off   380-3C3
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/ttyR[0-4][0-9a-f]"
.It Pa /dev/ttyR[0-4][0-9a-f]
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Theodore Ts'o Aq Mt tytso@mit.edu
.Pp
This driver was written under contract for Comtrol Corporation.
For dealer, distributor and other information regarding Comtrol
.Tn RocketPort ,
contact Comtrol Corporation at (800) 926-6876 or send email to
.Aq Mt info@comtrol.com .
To report bugs for this driver, please send email to
.Aq Mt bug-bsdi-rocketport@comtrol.com .
.Sh BUGS
If incoming software flow control is enabled on a 486 or Pentium
machine, and the flow control is very heavily exercised, on rare occasions
a character will get dropped.
This problem does not occur on a 386, and
it is not currently known whether the bug is in the
.Nm
driver
or in the
.Bsx
tty layer.
.\" (Although my bet is that it's in the higher-level tty layer;
.\" given the bugs I found while writing this driver, it's clear
.\" the BSD software flow control code has not been tested very much
.\" at all! -- TYT)
