.\" $OpenBSD: rport.4,v 1.2 2024/08/31 13:39:36 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 David Gwynne <dlg@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 31 2024 $
.Dt RPORT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rport
.Nd rdomain port interface pseudo-device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device rport"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides point-to-point interfaces for layer 3 connectivity
between
.Xr rdomain 4
instances.
.Pp
Layer 3 connectivity between a pair of rdomains can be established
by creating an
.Nm
interface in each rdomain, and connecting them together by configuring
one of these interfaces as the parent of the other.
.Pp
.Nm
interfaces can be created at runtime using the
.Ic ifconfig rport Ns Ar N Ic create
command or by setting up a
.Xr hostname.if 5
configuration file for
.Xr netstart 8 .
The interface itself can be configured with
.Xr ifconfig 8 ;
see its manual page for more information.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Create two
.Nm
interfaces in separate
.Xr rdomain 4
instances and connect them together:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# ifconfig rport0 create rdomain 0 up
# ifconfig rport1 create rdomain 1 parent rport0 up
# ifconfig rport0 inet 192.168.0.0/32 192.168.0.1
# ifconfig rport1 inet 192.168.0.1/32 192.168.0.0
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr veb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr pf.conf 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr netstart 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 7.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An David Gwynne Aq Mt dlg@openbsd.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
A pair of
.Nm
interfaces must be created for each connection between a pair of rdomains.
Alternatively, if peering between multiple
.Xr rdomain 4
instances is required, a single
.Xr veb 4
interface with a
.Xr vport 4
interface for each rdomain can be used instead.
