.\"	$OpenBSD: rtw.4,v 1.49 2025/03/27 10:21:53 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Jonathan Gray <jsg@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 27 2025 $
.Dt RTW 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rtw
.Nd Realtek RTL8180L IEEE 802.11b wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "rtw* at cardbus?"
.Cd "rtw* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports PCI/CardBus 802.11b wireless adapters based on the
Realtek RTL8180L.
.Pp
A variety of radio transceivers can be found in these devices, including
the Philips SA2400A, Maxim MAX2820, and GCT GRF5101.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It IBSS mode
Also known as
.Em IEEE ad-hoc
mode or
.Em peer-to-peer
mode.
This is the standardized method of operating without an access point.
Stations associate with a service set.
However, actual connections between stations are peer-to-peer.
.It Host AP
In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
for other cards.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use software
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP).
It is strongly recommended that WEP
not be used as the sole mechanism
to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses in it.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The following adapters should work:
.Bl -column "GigaFast WF721-AEX (R* serial)" "GRF5101" "Cardbus" -offset 6n
.It Em Card Ta Em Radio Ta Em Bus
.\".It Li "Acer Aspire 1357 LMi" Ta SA2400 Ta Mini PCI
.It Li "Allnet ALL0182" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Belkin F5D6001 V3" Ta SA2400 Ta PCI
.It Li "Belkin F5D6020 V3" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Buffalo WLI-CB-B11" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Corega CG-WLCB11V3" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "D-Link DWL-510" Ta SA2400 Ta PCI
.\".It Li "D-Link DWL-520 rev D" Ta ? Ta PCI
.It Li "D-Link DWL-610" Ta ? Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Encore ENLWI-PCI1-NT" Ta SA2400 Ta PCI
.It Li "Edimax EW-7106" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Edimax EW-7126" Ta GRF5101 Ta PCI
.\".It Li "Gigabyte GN-WLMR101" Ta SA2400 Ta PCI
.It Li "GigaFast WF721-AEX (R* serial)" Ta "GRF5101" Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "HomeLine HLW-PCC200" Ta "GRF5101" Ta CardBus
.It Li "Jensen AirLink 6011" Ta GRF5101 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Level-One WPC-0101" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Linksys WPC11 v4" Ta MAX2820 Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Longshine LCS-8031-R" Ta GRF5101 Ta PCI
.\".It Li "Mentor WLPCI04330073" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Micronet SP906BB" Ta ? Ta PCI
.It Li "Netgear MA521" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Ovislink AirLive WL-1120PCM" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Pheenet WL-11PCIR" Ta SA2400 Ta PCI
.It Li "Planet WL-3553" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Q-Tec 770WC" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Q-Tec 775WC" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.\".It "Repotec RP-WP7126" Ta GRF5101 Ta PCI
.It Li "Roper FreeLan 802.11b" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "SAFECOM SWLCR-1100" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Surecom EP-9428" Ta ? Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "Sweex LC700010" Ta GRF5101 Ta PCI
.\".It "Tonze PC-2100T" Ta GRF5101 Ta PCI
.\".It Li "Topcom Skyr@cer 4011b" Ta ? Ta CardBus
.\".It "TP-Link TL-WN250/251" Ta GRF5101 Ta PCI
.It Li "TRENDnet TEW-226PC" Ta ? Ta CardBus
.\".It Li "TRENDnet TEW-288PI" Ta SA2400 Ta PCI
.It Li "VCTnet PC-11B1" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Winstron CB-200B" Ta SA2400 Ta CardBus
.It Li "Zonet ZEW1000" Ta GRF5101 Ta CardBus
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig rtw0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures rtw0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WEP key
.Dq mywepkey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nwid mynwid nwkey mywepkey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example creates a host-based access point on boot:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mediaopt hostap
nwid mynwid nwkey mywepkey
inet 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cardbus 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T Realtek
.%U https://www.realtek.com/en
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An David Young Aq Mt dyoung@NetBSD.org
and ported to
.Ox
by
.An Jonathan Gray Aq Mt jsg@openbsd.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
GCT refuse to release any documentation on their GRF5101 RF transceiver.
.Pp
While PCI devices will attach, most of them are not able to transmit.
.Pp
Host AP mode doesn't support power saving.
Clients attempting to use power saving mode may experience significant
packet loss (disabling power saving on the client will fix this).
