.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Kevin Lo
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Andriy Voskoboinyk
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 3, 2019
.Dt RTWNFW 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rtwnfw
.Nd "Firmware Module for Realtek Wireless driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this module into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device rtwnfw"
.Ed
.Pp
This will include all firmware images inside the kernel.
If you want to pick only the firmware image for your network adapter choose one
of the following:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8188eefw"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8188eufw"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8192cfwE_B"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8192cfwE"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8192cfwT"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8192cfwU"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8192eufw"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8812aufw"
.Cd "device rtwn-rtl8821aufw"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load all firmware images as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
rtwn-rtl8188eefw_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8188eufw_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8192cfwE_B_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8192cfwE_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8192cfwT_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8192cfwU_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8192eufw_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8812aufw_load="YES"
rtwn-rtl8821aufw_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
rtwn-rtl8192cfwE and rtl8192cfwE_B modules provide access
to firmware sets for the Realtek RTL8188CE chip based PCIe adapters.
rtwn-rtl8188ee module provides access to firmware sets for the
Realtek RTL8188EE chip based PCIe adapters.
Other modules provide access to firmware sets for the Realtek RTL8188CUS,
RTL8188CE-VAU, RTL8188EUS, RTL8188RU, RTL8192CU, RTL8192EU, RTL8812AU and
RTL8821AU chip based USB WiFi adapters.
They may be
statically linked into the kernel, or loaded as a modules.
.Pp
For the loaded firmware to be enabled for use the license at
.Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/realtek.LICENSE
must be agreed to by adding the following line to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Pp
.Dl "legal.realtek.license_ack=1"
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/realtek.LICENSE" -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/realtek.LICENSE
.Nm
firmware license
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rtwn 4 ,
.Xr firmware 9
