.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003, Shunsuke Akiyama <akiyama@FreeBSD.org>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 24, 2015
.Dt RUE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rue
.Nd "RealTek RTL8150 USB to Fast Ethernet controller driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device uether"
.Cd "device rue"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_rue_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB Ethernet adapters based on the RealTek
RTL8150 USB to Fast Ethernet controller chip.
.Pp
The RTL8150 contains an integrated Fast Ethernet MAC, which supports
both 10 and 100Mbps speeds in either full or half duplex.
Although designed to interface with
100Mbps peripheral, the existing USB standard specifies a maximum
transfer speed of 12Mbps.
Users should therefore not expect to actually
achieve 100Mbps speeds with this device.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable auto selection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the auto selected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports RealTek RTL8150 based USB Ethernet
adapters including:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-KTX
.It
Green House GH-USB100B
.It
LinkSys USB100M
.It
Billionton 10/100 FastEthernet USBKR2
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "rue%d: watchdog timeout"
A packet was queued for transmission and a transmit command was
issued, however the device failed to acknowledge the transmission
before a timeout expired.
.It "rue%d: rx list init failed"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the transmitter ring.
.It "rue%d: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T "RealTek RTL8150 data sheet"
.%U http://pdf.seekdatasheet.com/2008714/200807142333305235.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Shunsuke Akiyama Aq Mt akiyama@FreeBSD.org .
