.\" $OpenBSD: rum.4,v 1.64 2025/03/27 15:12:14 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005-2007
.\"	Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 27 2025 $
.Dt RUM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rum
.Nd Ralink Technology/MediaTek USB IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "rum* at uhub? port ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports USB 2.0 and PCI Express Mini Card wireless adapters based on the
Ralink RT2501USB and RT2601USB chipsets.
.Pp
Ralink PCI Express Mini Card adapters show up as normal USB 2.0 devices and are
thus handled by the
.Nm
driver.
.Pp
The RT2501USB chipset is the second generation of 802.11a/b/g adapters from
Ralink.
It consists of two integrated chips, an RT2571W MAC/BBP and an RT2528 or
RT5226 radio transceiver.
.Pp
The RT2601USB chipset consists of two integrated chips, an RT2671 MAC/BBP and
an RT2527 or RT5225 radio transceiver.
This chipset uses the MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output) technology with
multiple antennas to extend the operating range of the adapter and to achieve
higher throughput.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It IBSS mode
Also known as
.Em IEEE ad-hoc
mode or
.Em peer-to-peer
mode.
This is the standardized method of operating without an access point.
Stations associate with a service set.
However, actual connections between stations are peer-to-peer.
.It Host AP
In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
for other cards.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
The
.Nm
driver relies on the software 802.11 stack for both encryption and decryption
of data frames.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The following firmware file is loaded when an interface is brought up:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It /etc/firmware/rum-rt2573
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The following adapters should work:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It 3Com Aolynk WUB320g
.It Abocom WUG2700
.It Airlink101 AWLL5025
.It ASUS WL-167g ver 2
.It Atlantis Land A02-UP1-W54
.It Belkin F5D7050 ver 3
.It Belkin F5D9050 ver 3
.It Belkin F5D9050C
.It Buffalo WLI-U2-SG54HG
.It Buffalo WLI-U2-SG54HP
.It Buffalo WLI-U2-G54HP
.It CNet CWD-854 ver F
.It Conceptronic C54RU ver 2
.It Corega CG-WLUSB2GL
.It Corega CG-WLUSB2GO
.It Corega CG-WLUSB2GPX
.It D-Link DWA-110
.It D-Link DWA-111
.It "D-Link DWL-G122 rev C1"
.It D-Link WUA-1340
.It Digitus DN-7003GR
.It Edimax EW-7318Ug
.It Edimax EW-7318USg
.It Edimax EW-7618Ug
.It Gigabyte GN-WB01GS
.It Gigabyte GN-WI05GS
.It Hawking HWUG1
.It Hawking HWU54DM
.It Hercules HWGUSB2-54-LB
.It Hercules HWGUSB2-54V2-AP
.It LevelOne WNC-0301USB v3
.It Linksys WUSB200
.It Linksys WUSB54G rev C
.It Linksys WUSB54GR
.It Planex GW-US54HP
.It Planex GW-US54Mini2
.It Planex GW-USMM
.It Senao NUB-3701
.It Sitecom WL-113 ver 2
.It Sitecom WL-172
.It Sweex LW053
.It TP-LINK TL-WN321G
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig rum0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures rum0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nwid mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example creates a host-based access point on boot:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mediaopt hostap
nwid mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "rum0: error N, could not read firmware ..."
For some reason, the driver was unable to read the microcode file from the
filesystem.
The file might be missing or corrupted.
.It "rum0: could not load 8051 microcode"
An error occurred while attempting to upload the microcode to the onboard 8051
microcontroller unit.
.It "rum0: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Niall O'Higgins Aq Mt niallo@openbsd.org
and
.An Damien Bergamini Aq Mt damien.bergamini@free.fr .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver supports automatic control of the transmit speed in BSS mode only.
Therefore the use of a
.Nm
adapter in Host AP mode is discouraged.
