.\" $OpenBSD: run.4,v 1.22 2009/11/23 06:16:32 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 8, 2018
.Dt RUN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm run
.Nd Ralink Technology USB IEEE 802.11a/g/n wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ehci"
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device run"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Cd "device wlan_amrr"
.Ed
.Pp
Firmware is also needed, and provided by:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device runfw"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_run_load="YES"
runfw_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports USB 2.0 wireless adapters based on the Ralink RT2700U,
RT2800U, RT3000U and RT3900E chipsets.
.Pp
The RT2700U chipset consists of two integrated chips, an RT2770 MAC/BBP and
an RT2720 (1T2R) or RT2750 (dual-band 1T2R) radio transceiver.
.Pp
The RT2800U chipset consists of two integrated chips, an RT2870 MAC/BBP and
an RT2820 (2T3R) or RT2850 (dual-band 2T3R) radio transceiver.
.Pp
The RT3000U is a single-chip solution based on an RT3070 MAC/BBP and
an RT3020 (1T1R), RT3021 (1T2R) or RT3022 (2T2R) single-band radio
transceiver.
.Pp
The RT3900E is a single-chip USB 2.0 802.11n solution.
The MAC/Baseband Processor can be an RT3593, RT5390, RT5392 or an RT5592.
The radio can be an RT3053, RT5370, RT5372 or an RT5572.
The RT3053 chip operates in the 2GHz and 5GHz spectra and supports up to
3 transmit paths and 3 receiver paths (3T3R).
The RT5370 chip operates in the 2GHz spectrum and supports 1 transmit path
and 1 receiver path (1T1R).
The RT5372 chip operates in the 2GHz spectrum and supports up to 2 transmit
paths and 2 receiver paths (2T2R).
The RT5572 chip operates in the 2GHz and 5GHz spectra and supports up to
2 transmit paths and 2 receiver paths (2T2R).
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It Host AP mode
In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
for other cards.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA-PSK and WPA2-PSK).
WPA is the de facto encryption standard for wireless networks.
It is strongly recommended that WEP
not be used as the sole mechanism
to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses in it.
The
.Nm
driver offloads both encryption and decryption of data frames to the
hardware for the WEP40, WEP104, TKIP(+MIC) and CCMP ciphers.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following wireless adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Airlink101 AWLL6090
.It ASUS USB-N11
.It ASUS USB-N13 ver. A1
.It ASUS USB-N66
.It ASUS WL-160N
.It Belkin F5D8051 ver 3000
.It Belkin F5D8053
.It Belkin F5D8055
.It Belkin F6D4050 ver 1
.It Belkin F9L1103
.It Buffalo WLI-UC-AG300N
.It Buffalo WLI-UC-G300HP
.It Buffalo WLI-UC-G300N
.It Buffalo WLI-UC-G301N
.It Buffalo WLI-UC-GN
.It Buffalo WLI-UC-GNM
.It Buffalo WLI-UC-GNM2
.It Corega CG-WLUSB2GNL
.It Corega CG-WLUSB2GNR
.It Corega CG-WLUSB300AGN
.It Corega CG-WLUSB300GNM
.It D-Link DWA-130 rev B1
.It D-Link DWA-140 rev B1, B2, B3, \&D1
.It D-Link DWA-160 rev B2
.It D-Link DWA-162
.It DrayTek Vigor N61
.It Edimax EW-7711UAn
.It Edimax EW-7711UTn
.It Edimax EW-7717Un
.It Edimax EW-7718Un
.It Edimax EW-7733UnD
.It Gigabyte GN-WB30N
.It Gigabyte GN-WB31N
.It Gigabyte GN-WB32L
.It Hawking HWDN1
.It Hawking HWUN1
.It Hawking HWUN2
.It Hercules HWNU-300
.It Linksys WUSB54GC v3
.It Linksys WUSB600N
.It Logitec LAN-W150N/U2
.It Mvix Nubbin MS-811N
.It Panda Wireless PAU06
.It Planex GW-USMicroN
.It Planex GW-US300MiniS
.It Sitecom WL-182
.It Sitecom WL-188
.It Sitecom WL-301
.It Sitecom WL-302
.It Sitecom WL-315
.It SMC SMCWUSBS-N2
.It Sweex LW303
.It Sweex LW313
.It TP-LINK TL-WDN3200
.It TP-LINK TL-WN321G v4
.It TP-LINK TL-WN727N v3
.It Unex DNUR-81
.It Unex DNUR-82
.It ZyXEL NWD2705
.It ZyXEL NWD210N
.It ZyXEL NWD270N
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev run0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
    netmask 0xffffff00
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wlan create wlandev run0 ssid my_net up"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev run0 ssid my_net \e
	wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 weptxkey 1 up
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 128-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev run0 wlanmode adhoc ssid my_net \e
    wepmode on wepkey 0x01020304050607080910111213 weptxkey 1
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "run%d: faild load firmware of file runfw"
For some reason, the driver was unable to read the microcode file from the
filesystem.
The file might be missing or corrupted.
.It "run%d: could not load 8051 microcode"
An error occurred while attempting to upload the microcode to the onboard 8051
microcontroller unit.
.It "run%d: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr runfw 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr wlan_amrr 4 ,
.Xr wlan_ccmp 4 ,
.Xr wlan_tkip 4 ,
.Xr wlan_wep 4 ,
.Xr wlan_xauth 4 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Pp
Ralink Technology:
.Pa http://www.ralinktech.com/
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Damien Bergamini Aq Mt damien@openbsd.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver does not support any of the 802.11n capabilities offered by the
RT2800, RT3000 and RT3900 chipsets.
