.\"	$OpenBSD: safte.4,v 1.8 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 David Gwynne <dlg@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt SAFTE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm safte
.Nd SCSI Accessed Fault-Tolerant Enclosure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "safte* at scsibus?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for monitoring the various environmental sensors
present in SCSI enclosures using the SCSI Accessed Fault-Tolerant Enclosure
command set.
The hardware monitor is used with the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface.
.Pp
SAF-TE compliant devices can provide an arbitrary set of sensors from the
following types:
.Bl -column "Sensor" "Units" "Typical" -offset indent
.It Sy "Sensor" Ta Sy "Units" Ta Sy "Typical Use"
.It Li "temp" Ta "uK" Ta "temperature"
.It Li "fan" Ta "RPM" Ta "fan"
.It Li "psu" Ta "On/Off" Ta "power supply"
.It Li "doorlock" Ta "On/Off" Ta "door lock"
.It Li "alarm" Ta "On/Off" Ta "enclosure alarm"
.El
.Pp
Sensor data is updated every 10 seconds.
.Pp
An enclosure may provide environmental information using an alternative
to the SCSI Accessed Fault-Tolerant Enclosure command set used by this driver.
Enclosures using the SCSI Enclosure Services command set
may be monitored by the
.Xr ses 4
driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr scsibus 4 ,
.Xr ses 4 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.8 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An David Gwynne Aq Mt dlg@openbsd.org .
