.\"	$OpenBSD: sbus.4,v 1.55 2021/09/08 20:29:21 jmc Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: sbus.4,v 1.5 2002/01/21 17:54:10 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Paul Kranenburg.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 8 2021 $
.Dt SBUS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sbus
.Nd introduction to SBus bus support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "sbus* at mainbus?"
.Cd "sbus* at xbox?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These
.Nm
attachments are specific to the sparc64 port.
.Pp
.Nm
is an I/O interconnect bus mostly found in SPARC workstations
and small to medium server class systems.
It supports both on-board peripherals and extension boards.
The
.Nm
specifications define the bus protocol as well as the electrical and
mechanical properties of the extension slots.
.Pp
.Ox
provides support for the following devices.
Note that not all architectures support all devices.
.Ss Audio interfaces
.Bl -tag -width 13n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr audiocs 4
SPARC CS4231 audio device
.El
.Ss SCSI interfaces
.Bl -tag -width 13n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr esp 4
ESP NCR 53c94 on-board or SBus SCSI interface
.It Xr qla 4
QLogic ISP2100/2200/2300 Fibre Channel controller
.It Xr qlw 4
QLogic ISP1000/1020/1x40/1x80/1x160 SCSI controller
.El
.Ss Network interfaces
.Bl -tag -width 13n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr be 4
SPARC 10/100 Ethernet device
.It Xr gem 4
GEM 10/100/1Gb Ethernet device
.It Xr hme 4
Sun Happy Meal 10/100 Ethernet device
.It Xr le 4
AMD LANCE Ethernet device
.It Xr lebuffer 4 , Xr ledma 4
AMD LANCE Ethernet device
.It Xr qe 4
SPARC 10/100 Ethernet device
.It Xr qec 4
SPARC Quad Ethernet Controller
.It Xr ti 4
Alteon Networks Tigon I and II Gigabit Ethernet device
.El
.Ss Bridges
.Bl -tag -width 13n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr stp 4
SBus PCMCIA bridge
.El
.Ss Graphics devices
.Bl -tag -width 13n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr agten 4
Fujitsu AG-10e accelerated 24-bit color frame buffer
.It Xr bwtwo 4
Monochromatic frame buffer
.It Xr cgsix 4
Accelerated 8-bit color frame buffer
.It Xr cgthree 4
8-bit color frame buffer
.It Xr cgtwelve 4
Accelerated 24-bit color frame buffer
.It Xr mgx 4
SMS MGX and MGXPlus accelerated 24-bit color frame buffers
.It Xr rfx 4
Vitec/Connectware/AP&D
RasterFlex framebuffer series
.It Xr tvtwo 4
Accelerated 24-bit color frame buffer
.It Xr vigra 4
8-bit SBus color frame buffer with VGA-compatible modes
.It Xr zx 4
Accelerated 24-bit color frame buffer
.El
.Ss Serial and parallel interfaces
.Bl -tag -width 13n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr apio 4
Aurora Technologies pio1 parallel port card
.It Xr asio 4
Aurora Technologies pio2 serial port card
.It Xr bpp 4
parallel port
.It Xr magma 4
Magma LC series Serial/Parallel Interface cards
.It Xr spif 4
Sun Serial/Parallel Interface card
.It Xr zs 4
Zilog 8530 (ZSCC) serial communications driver
.El
.Ss Miscellaneous devices
.Bl -tag -width 13n -offset ind -compact
.It Xr auxio 4
Miscellaneous I/O controls
.It Xr clock 4
real-time clock
.It Xr fdc 4
NEC765 compatible floppy disk driver
.It Xr uperf 4
Performance counters on the host bridge
.It Xr xbox 4
SBus Expansion subsystem
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4
.Sh HISTORY
The machine-independent
.Nm sbus
subsystem appeared in
.Nx 1.3 .
.Ox
support first appeared in
.Ox 2.0 .
