.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Marcel Moolenaar
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 29, 2006
.Dt SCC 4
.Os
.\"
.Sh NAME
.Nm scc
.Nd driver for Serial Communications Controllers (SCC) devices
.\"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device scc"
.Cd "device uart"
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for various classes of SCCs.
It is an umbrella driver that delegates control of each independent
communication channel to subordinate drivers.
These subordinate drivers, like
.Xr uart 4 ,
take care of the details of the communication itself.
.\"
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following classes of SCCs:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
SAB82532: Siemens SAB 82532 based serial communications controllers.
.It
Z8530: Zilog 8530 based serial communications controllers.
.El
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr puc 4 ,
.Xr uart 4
.\"
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Marcel Moolenaar Aq Mt marcel@xcllnt.net .
