.\"	$OpenBSD: schsio.4,v 1.4 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Michael Knudsen <mk@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt SCHSIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm schsio
.Nd SMSC SCH311x LPC Super I/O
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "schsio* at isa? port 0x2e   flags 0x0000"
.Cd "schsio* at isa? port 0x4e   flags 0x0000"
.Cd "schsio* at isa? port 0x162e flags 0x0000"
.Cd "schsio* at isa? port 0x164e flags 0x0000"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the SMSC SCH3112, SCH3114, and SCH3116
ICs.
Among other things, the devices contain environment sensors, a watchdog
timer, and fan control.
The
.Nm
driver supports the environment sensors and the watchdog timer.
.Pp
The hardware provides the following sensors:
.Bl -column "Internal diode" "Units" "Typical" -offset indent
.It Sy "Sensor" Ta Sy "Units" Ta Sy "Typical use"
.It Li "Internal diode" Ta "uK" Ta "IC internal thermal diode"
.It Li "Remote diode 1" Ta "uK" Ta "External thermal diode"
.It Li "Remove diode 2" Ta "uK" Ta "External thermal diode"
.It Li "FAN1" Ta "RPM" Ta "Fan tachometer"
.It Li "FAN2" Ta "RPM" Ta "Fan tachometer"
.It Li "FAN3" Ta "RPM" Ta "Fan tachometer"
.It Li "+2.5V" Ta "uV" Ta "Voltage"
.It Li "+1.5V (Vccp)" Ta "uV" Ta "Voltage"
.It Li "+3.3V (VCC)" Ta "uV" Ta "Voltage"
.It Li "+5V" Ta "uV" Ta "Voltage"
.It Li "+12V" Ta "uV" Ta "Voltage"
.It Li "+3.3V (VTR)" Ta "uV" Ta "Voltage"
.It Li "+3V (Vbat)" Ta "uV" Ta "Voltage"
.El
.Pp
.Nm
provides the standard
.Xr watchdog 4
interface and may be used with
.Xr watchdogd 8 .
The watchdog timer may be configured to a value from 1 second to 255
minutes.
The watchdog timer has a resolution of 1 second in the timeout interval
1 to 255 seconds.
Outside this interval, the resolution is 1 minute.
.Pp
Note that the pin used for signalling the timer expiration is
configurable and may on some boards be intended for other uses than this.
Because of this, the chip may not by default be configured to use the
pin for watchdog operation.
To force the
.Nm
device to use the pin for watchdog operation, the driver may be
configured with an
.Xr autoconf 9
.Ar flags
setting of 0x0001.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr watchdogd 8 ,
.Xr autoconf 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Michael Knudsen Aq Mt mk@openbsd.org .
