.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 6, 2000
.Dt SCREEN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm screen
.Nd pc display interface
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Access to the
.Em virtual consoles
are obtained through the device files
.Pa /dev/ttyv0
-
.Pa /dev/ttyvb .
Each of these files correspond to a separate
virtual console.
All virtual console devices can be open at once, but only one is
active at a time.
The active virtual console "owns" the keyboard and
display screen.
.Pp
Output to a virtual console that not currently is on the display is
saved in a buffer that holds a "screenfull" (normally 25) lines.
Any output written to
.Pa /dev/console
(the original console device) is echoed to
.Pa /dev/ttyv0 .
.Pp
To switch between the virtual consoles one uses the sequence
.Em ALT+Fn ,
which means hold down ALT and press one of the function keys.
The
virtual console with the same number as the function key is then
selected as the current virtual console, and given exclusive use of
the keyboard and display.
This switch sequence can be changed via
the keyboard mapping ioctl call (see
.Xr keyboard 4 ) .
.Pp
The console allows entering values that are not physically
present on the keyboard via a special keysequence.
To use this facility press and hold down ALT,
then enter a decimal number from 0-255 via the numerical keypad, then
release ALT.
The entered value is then used as the ASCII value for one
character.
This way it is possible to enter any ASCII value.
The console driver also includes a history function.
It is activated by
pressing the scroll-lock key.
This holds the display, and enables the cursor
arrows for scrolling up and down through the last scrolled out lines.
.Pp
The console understands a subset of the ANSI x3.64 character
sequences.
For compatibility with the old pccons, the PC3 character
sequences are also supported.
.Bd -literal
ANSI	Seq	Function				Termcap entry
======= ======= =====================================   ==============

--	E7	Save cursor position			sc

--	E8	Restore	saved cursor position		rc

--	Ec	Reset					rs

--	EM	move cursor up 1 line,			--
		scroll if at top

CUU     E[nA    move cursor up n lines                  up/UP (ku)

CUD     E[nB    move cursor down n lines                do/DO (kd)

CUF     E[nC    move cursor right n characters          nd/RI (kr)

CUB     E[nD    move cursor left n characters           --/LE (kl)

HPA     E[n`    move cursor to character position n     ch

HPR	E[na	move cursor right n characters 		--

VPA     E[nd    move cursor to line n                   cv

VPR	E[ne	move cursor down n lines		--

CPL     E[nF    move cursor to start of line,           -- (@7)
		n lines up

CNL     E[nE    move cursor to start of line,           nw
		n lines down

CUP	E[y;xH	Move cursor to x, y			cm

HVP	E[y;xf	Move cursor to x, y			--

CBT     E[nZ    Move cursor back n tab stops            bt (kB)

IL      E[nL    Insert n blank lines                    al/AL

ICH     E[n@    Insert n blank characters               ic/IC

DL      E[nM    Delete n lines                          dl/DL

DCH     E[nP    Delete n characters                     dc/DC

ED	E[nJ	Erase part or all of display:		cd
		n=0 from cursor to end of display,
		n=1 from begin of display to cursor,
		n=2 entire display.

EL	E[nK	Erase part or all of line:		ce
		n=0 from cursor to end of line,
		n=1 from begin of line to cursor,
		n=2 entire line.

ECH     E[nX    Erase n characters                      ec

SU      E[nS    Scroll display n lines up (forward)     sf/SF

SD      E[nT    Scroll display n lines down (reverse)   sr/SR


SGR	E[nm	Set character attributes:		--
		n= 0  normal attribute (all off)
		n= 1  bold (highlight)
		n= 4  underscore (if supported by HW)
		n= 5  blink (if supported by HW)
		n= 7  reverse
		n= 22 remove bold
		n= 24 remove underscore
		n= 25 remove blink
		n= 27 remove reverse
		n= 3X set ANSI foreground color
		      (see table)
		n= 4X set ANSI background color
		      (see table)

		   X=0 black 	X=1 red
		   X=2 green	X=3 brown
		   X=4 blue	X=5 magenta
		   X=6 cyan	X=7 light grey
		   X=9 reset to the normal color

--	E[s	Save cursor position			sc

--	E[u	Restore	saved cursor position		rc

--      E[x     Reset normal colors and attributes      --
		to their default values

--	E[nz	Switch to virtual console n		--

--      E[1;nx  Set normal ANSI background color        --
		to n (see table)

--      E[2;nx  Set normal ANSI foreground color        --
		to n (see table)

--      E[3;nx  Set normal video attribute directly     --
		to n (n	from 0 to 255)

--      E[5;nx  Set normal ANSI reverse background      --
		color to n (see	table)

--      E[6;nx  Set normal ANSI reverse foreground      --
		color to n (see	table)

		   n= 0	black	   n= 8	dark grey
		   n= 1	red	   n= 9	light red
		   n= 2	green	   n=10	light green
		   n= 3	brown	   n=11	yellow
		   n= 4	blue	   n=12	light blue
		   n= 5	magenta	   n=13	light magenta
		   n= 6	cyan	   n=14	light cyan
		   n= 7	light grey n=15	white

--      E[7;nx  Set normal reverse video attribute      --
		directly to n (n from 0	to 255)

--	E[=p;dB	Set bell pitch (p) and duration (d),	--
			pitch is in units of 840 nS,
			duration is units of 0,1 S.

--	E[=tC	Set global cursor type (see table)	--

		   t=0 normal non-blinking
		   t=1 normal blinking
		   t=2 custom non-blinking
		   t=3 custom blinking
		   t=4 reset cursor (resets custom
		       cursor shape and sets current
		       cursor type to 0)
		   t=5 hide cursor

--	E[=s;eC	Set custom cursor shape, where		--
		s is the starting and e is the ending
		scanlines of the cursor.

--	E[=s;e;dC					--
		Same as above, except d specifies the
		direction.  If 0, scanlines are counted
		from the top to the bottom.  If 1, from
		the bottom to the top.

--	E[=tS	Set local cursor type (see table)	--

		   t=0 normal (global)			ve
		   t=1 invisible			vi
		   t=2 very visible			vs

--      E[=nA   Set the border color to n               --
		(see table) (if supported by HW)

--      E[=nF   Set normal foreground color to n        --
		(see table)

--      E[=nG   Set normal background color to n        --
		(see table)

--      E[=nH   Set normal reverse foreground color     --
		to n (see table)

--      E[=nI   Set normal reverse background color     --
		to n (see table)

		   n= 0	black	   n= 8	dark grey
		   n= 1	blue	   n= 9	light blue
		   n= 2	green	   n=10	light green
		   n= 3	cyan	   n=11	light cyan
		   n= 4	red	   n=12	light red
		   n= 5	magenta	   n=13	light magenta
		   n= 6	brown	   n=14	yellow
		   n= 7	light grey n=15	white

note: the first E in the sequences stands for ESC (0x1b)
.Ed
.Sh AUTHORS
.An S\(/oren Schmidt Aq Mt sos@FreeBSD.org
