.\"	$OpenBSD: sd.4,v 1.21 2024/12/21 01:00:31 jsg Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: sd.4,v 1.3 1996/10/20 23:15:23 explorer Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996
.\"     Julian Elischer <julian@freebsd.org>.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 21 2024 $
.Dt SD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sd
.Nd SCSI disk driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "sd* at scsibus?"
.Cd "#sd0 at scsibus0 target 3 lun 0" Pq fixed-configuration example
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for a
.Tn SCSI
disk.
It allows the disk to be divided up into a set of pseudo devices called
.Em partitions .
In general the interfaces are similar to those described by
.Xr wd 4 .
.Pp
.Tn SCSI
devices have a fairly high level interface to the system and talk to it via
a
.Tn SCSI
host adapter
(e.g.,
.Xr ahc 4 ) .
A
.Tn SCSI
adapter must also be separately configured into the system
before a
.Tn SCSI
disk can be configured.
.Pp
When the
.Tn SCSI
adapter is probed during boot, the
.Tn SCSI
bus is scanned for devices.
Any devices found which answer as
.Sq Em Direct
type devices will be attached to the
.Nm
driver.
.\"In
.\".Fx
.\"releases prior to 2.1, the first found was attached as
.\".Li sd0 ,
.\"the second
.\".Li sd1 ,
.\"and so on.
.\"Beginning in 2.1 it became possible to lock down the assignment of
.\"devices on the
.\".Tn SCSI
.\"bus to particular units of the
.\".Nm
.\"device; refer to
.\".Xr scsi 4
.\"for details on kernel configuration.
.Sh PARTITIONING
.\"The
.\".Nm
.\"driver allows the disk to have two levels of partitioning.
.\"One layer, called the
.\".Dq slice layer ,
.\"is used to separate the
.\".Fx
.\"areas of the disk from areas used by other operating systems.
.\"The second layer is the native
.\".Bx 4.4
.\"partitioning scheme,
.\".Xr disklabel 5 ,
.\"which is used to subdivide the
.\".Fx
.\"slices into areas for individual filesystems and swap spaces.
.\"For more information, see
.\".Xr fdisk 8
.\"and
.\".Xr disklabel 8 ,
.\"respectively.)
On many systems
.Xr disklabel 8
is used to partition the drive into filesystems.
On some systems the
.Ox
portion of the disk resides within a native partition, and another
program is used to create the
.Ox
portion.
.Pp
For example, the i386 port uses
.Xr fdisk 8
to partition the disk into a BIOS level partition.
This allows sharing the disk with other operating systems.
.\"If an uninitialized disk is opened, the slice table will be
.\"initialized with a fictitious
.\".Fx
.\"slice spanning the entire disk. Similarly, if an uninitialized
.\"(or
.\".No non- Ns Fx )
.\"slice is opened, its disklabel will be initialized with parameters returned
.\"by the drive and a single
.\".Sq Li c
.\"partition encompassing the entire slice.
.Sh IOCTLS
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls apply to
.Tn SCSI
disks as well as to other disks.
They are defined in the header file
.In sys/dkio.h .
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.\".It Dv DIOCSBAD
.\"Usually used to set up a bad-block mapping system on the disk.
.\".Tn SCSI
.\"drive incorporate their own bad-block mapping so this command is not
.\"implemented.
.It Dv DIOCGDINFO Fa "struct disklabel *"
Read, from the kernel, the in-core copy of the disklabel for the
drive.
This may be a fictitious disklabel if the drive has never
been initialized, in which case it will contain information read
from the
.Tn SCSI
inquiry commands.
.It Dv DIOCSDINFO Fa "struct disklabel *"
Give the driver a new disklabel to use.
The driver
.Em will not
write the new
disklabel to the disk.
.It Dv DIOCWDINFO Fa "struct disklabel *"
Give the driver a new disklabel to use.
The driver
.Em will
write the new disklabel to the disk.
.It Dv DIOCLOCK Fa "int *"
Lock the media cartridge into the device, or unlock a cartridge previously
locked.
Used to prevent user and software eject while the media is in use.
.It Dv DIOCEJECT
Eject the media cartridge from a removable device.
.It Dv DIOCINQ Fa "struct dk_inquiry *"
Read the devices product information.
.El
.Pp
In addition, the
.Xr scsi 4
general
.Fn ioctl
commands may be used with the
.Nm
driver, but only against the
.Sq Li c
(whole disk) partition.
.Sh NOTES
If a removable device is attached to the
.Nm
driver, then the act of changing the media will invalidate the
disklabel and information held within the kernel.
To avoid corruption, all access to the device will be discarded until there
are no more open file descriptors referencing the device.
During this period, all new open attempts will be rejected.
When no more open file descriptors reference the device, the first next
open will load a new set of parameters (including disklabel) for the drive.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/rsdXXXXX -compact
.It Pa /dev/sd Ns Ar u Ns Ar p
block mode
.Tn SCSI
disk unit
.Ar u ,
partition
.Ar p
.It Pa /dev/rsd Ns Ar u Ns Ar p
raw mode
.Tn SCSI
disk unit
.Ar u ,
partition
.Ar p
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
None.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr wd 4 ,
.Xr disklabel 5 ,
.Xr disklabel 8 ,
.Xr fdisk 8
.Sh HISTORY
.An Julian Elischer
wrote
.Nm
for Mach 2.5 and ported it to 386BSD.
