.\"	$OpenBSD: se.4,v 1.9 2021/09/08 20:29:21 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010
.\"	Christopher Zimmermann <madroach@zakweb.de>. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ee.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/sis.4,v 1.2 1999/11/15 23:14:27 phantom Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 8 2021 $
.Dt SE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm se
.Nd SiS 190/191 10/100/1Gb Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "se* at pci?"
.Cd "atphy* at mii?"
.Cd "brgphy* at mii?"
.Cd "eephy* at mii?"
.Cd "etphy* at mii?"
.Cd "rlphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the SiS190 Fast Ethernet controller
integrated into the SiS965L and SiS966L southbridges,
and the SiS191 Gigabit controller
integrated into the SiS965 and SiS966 southbridges.
.Pp
Both SiS 190 and SiS 191 embed an Ethernet MAC with external PHY.
They use a bus master DMA and a scatter/gather descriptor scheme
and include a 64-bit multicast hash filter.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width full-duplex
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the
.Xr hostname.if 5
file.
.It 10baseT
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 1000baseSX
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) on fiber operation.
Only
.Ar full-duplex
mode is supported at this speed.
.It 1000baseT
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) on copper operation.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width full-duplex
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "se0: EEPROM read timeout"
The driver could not read the controller's MAC address from its EEPROM.
.It "se0: invalid EEPROM signature"
The driver could not find the expected EEPROM signature and could not read
the controller's MAC address.
.It "se0: Could not find PCI-ISA bridge"
The driver could not read the controller's MAC address from the CMOS memory
connected to the PCI-ISA bridge.
.It "se0: PHY read timeout"
The driver could not read data from the PHY.
.It "se0: PHY write timeout"
The driver could not write data to the PHY.
.It "se0: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr atphy 4 ,
.Xr brgphy 4 ,
.Xr eephy 4 ,
.Xr etphy 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr rlphy 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.8 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was adapted by
.An Alexander Pohoyda Aq Mt alexander.pohoyda@gmx.net
from the
.Xr sis 4
driver written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ee.columbia.edu ,
and ported to
.Ox
by
.An Christopher Zimmermann Aq Mt madroach@zakweb.de .
SiS 191 support was added by
.An Nikolay Denev Aq Mt ndenev@gmail.com .
