.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Ana Kukec
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 19, 2010
.Dt SEND 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm send
.Nd "Kernel side support for Secure Neighbor Discovery (SeND)"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/socket.h
.In netinet/in.h
.In netinet6/send.h
.Ft int
.Fn socket PF_INET6 SOCK_RAW IPPROTO_SEND
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
send_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
IPv6 nodes use the Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP) to discover other nodes
on the link, to determine their link-layer addresses to find routers, and
to maintain reachability information about the paths to active members.
NDP is vulnerable to various attacks [RFC3756].
Secure Neighbor Discovery is a set of extensions to NDP that counter threats
to NDP [RFC3971].
.Pp
Kernel side support for SeND consists of a kernel module with hooks that
divert relevant packets (Neighbor Solicitations, Neighbor Advertisements,
Router Solicitations, Router Advertisements and Redirects) from the NDP stack,
send them to user space on a dedicated socket and reinject them back for
further processing.
Hooks are triggered only if the
.Nm
module is loaded.
.Pp
The native SeND socket is similar to a raw IP socket, but with its own,
internal pseudo-protocol (IPPROTO_SEND).
Struct sockaddr_send is defined in
.In netinet6/send.h .
It defines the total length of the structure, the address family, packet's
incoming or outgoing direction from the interface's point of view, and the
interface index.
.Bd -literal
struct sockaddr_send {
        unsigned char           send_len;       /* total length */
        sa_family_t             send_family;    /* address family */
        int                     send_direction;
        int                     send_ifidx;
        char                    send_zero[8];
};
.Ed
.Pp
The address family is always
.Va AF_INET6 .
The
.Va send_direction
variable denotes the direction of the packet from the interface's
point of view and has either the value
.Dv SND_IN
or
.Dv SND_OUT .
The
.Va send_ifidx
variable is the interface index of the receiving or sending interface.
The
.Va send_zero
variable is padding and must always be zero.
.Pp
In case that no user space application is connected to the send socket,
processing continues normally as if the module was not loaded.
.Sh INPUT HOOK
The input hook is named after the input path of the incoming or outgoing
NDP packets, on the way from the wire, through the nd6 stack, to user
space.
Relevant packets are identified by adding an mbuf_tag
(see
.Xr mbuf_tags 9 )
to the
.Xr mbuf 9 ,
if the
.Nm
module is loaded.
It is then passed on to the kernel-userland interface
for either cryptographic protection or validation by the SeND application.
The hook takes an argument that describes the direction of the packet, both
in case of incoming and outgoing packets.
.Dv SND_IN
is the direction of the incoming packets that are usually protected
by the SeND options and then sent to user space for cryptographic validation.
.Dv SND_OUT
is the outgoing direction.
It describes both reply and locally
originated outgoing packets that are sent to user space for the addition
of SeND options.
.Sh INCOMING PACKETS
The incoming ND packet from the wire:
.Bd -literal
                                        kernelspace ( userspace
                                                    )
 incoming SeND/ND packet                            (
            |                                       )
            v                 ( SND_IN )            (
           icmp6_input() -> send_input_hook ---> send socket ----+
            :                                       )            |
            :             #                 #       (            |
   normal   :             #                 #       )            v
 processing :             #     send.ko     #       (    SeND application
    path    :             #                 #       )            |
            :             #                 #       (            |
            v                                       )            |
   icmp6/nd6_??_input() <- protocol switch  <--- send socket <---+
            |         structure (IPPPROTO_SEND)     )
            |                ( SND_IN )             (
            v                                       )
 continue normal ND processing                      (
.Ed
.Sh OUTGOING PACKETS
Outgoing ND packet (reply or locally triggered):
.Bd -literal
                                        kernelspace ( userspace
                                                    )
 nd6_na_input()                                     (
 +PACKET_TAG_ND_OUTGOING                            )
 |                                                  )
 |   outgoing packet                                (
 |          |                                       )
 |          v                                       (
 |   icmp6_redirect_output()                        )
 |   nd6_ns_output()                                (
 |   nd6_na_output()                                )
 |   +PACKET_TAG_ND_OUTGOING                        (
 |          |                                       )
 |          +-----------<- rip6_output() <----------)----- rtsol/rtadvd/..
 |          |              +PACKET_TAG_ND_OUTGOING  (
 |          v                                       )
 |       ip6_output()                               (
 |          |                                       )
 +-------->-+                                       (
            |                                       )
            v                ( SND_OUT )            (
        nd6_output_lle() -> send_input_hook ---> send socket ----+
 -PACKET_TAG_ND_OUTGOING                            )            |
            :             #                 #       (            |
   normal   :             #                 #       )            v
 processing :             #     send.ko     #       (    SeND application
    path    :             #                 #       )            |
            :             #                 #       (            |
            v                                       )            |
    (*ifp->if_output)() <- protocol switch  <--- send socket <---+
            |         structure (IPPPROTO_SEND)     )
            |                ( SND_OUT )            (
            v                                       )
 continue with normal packet output                 (
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
A socket operation may fail with one of the following errors returned:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EEXIST
Another user space SeND application is bound to the socket.
.It Bq Er ENOBUFS
Shortage of space to receive the incoming (SeND-protected) or outgoing
(SeND-validated) packet from the SeND application.
.It Bq Er ENOSYS
A packet received from user space and passed to the NDP stack for further
processing is neither Neighbor Solicitation, Neighbor Advertisement,
Router Solicitation, Router Advertisement nor Redirect.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
Occurs if interface output routines fail to send the packet out of the
interface.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr recvfrom 2 ,
.Xr sendto 2 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module first appeared in
.Fx 9.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Ana Kukec Aq Mt anchie@FreeBSD.org ,
University of Zagreb
.Sh BUGS
Due to the lack of NDP locking, it is currently not possible to unload the
.Nm
module.
