.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2018
.Dt SF 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sf
.Nd "Adaptec AIC-6915"
.Qq Starfire
PCI Fast Ethernet adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device sf"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_sf_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Adaptec Duralink Fast Ethernet adapters
based on the Adaptec AIC-6915 "Starfire" chipset.
.Pp
The AIC-6915 is a bus master controller with an MII interface.
It
supports high and low priority transmit and receive queues, TCP/IP
checksum offload, multiple DMA descriptor formats and both polling
and producer/consumer DMA models.
The AIC-6915 receive filtering
options include a 16 entry perfect filter, a 512-bit hash table
for multicast addresses, a 512-bit hash table for priority address
matching and VLAN filtering.
An external MII-compliant transceiver
is required for media interfacing.
.Pp
Multiport adapters consist of several AIC-6915 controllers connected
via a PCI to PCI bridge.
Each controller is treated as a separate
interface by the
.Nm
driver.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
Adapters supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
ANA-62011 64-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter
.It
ANA-62022 64-bit dual port 10/100baseTX adapter
.It
ANA-62044 64-bit quad port 10/100baseTX adapter
.It
ANA-69011 32-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter
.It
ANA-62020 64-bit single port 100baseFX adapter
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.sf.%d.int_mod
Maximum amount of time to delay interrupt processing in units of
102.4us.
The accepted range is 0 to 31, the default value is 1 (102.4us).
Value 0 completely disables the interrupt moderation.
The interface does not need to be brought down and up again before
a change takes effect.
.It Va dev.sf.%d.stats
Display lots of useful MAC counters maintained in the driver.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "sf%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
This may
happen if the PCI BIOS not configured the device, which may be because
the BIOS has been configured for a "Plug and Play" operating system.
The "Plug and Play OS" setting in the BIOS should be set to "no" or
"off" in order for PCI devices to work properly with
.Fx .
.It "sf%d: couldn't map ports"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
This may
happen if the PCI BIOS not configured the device, which may be because
the BIOS has been configured for a "Plug and Play" operating system.
The "Plug and Play OS" setting in the BIOS should be set to "no" or
"off" in order for PCI devices to work properly with
.Fx .
.It "sf%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "sf%d: no memory for softc struct!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for per-device instance information
during initialization.
.It "sf%d: failed to enable I/O ports/memory mapping!"
The driver failed to initialize PCI I/O port or shared memory access.
This might happen if the card is not in a bus-master slot.
.It "sf%d: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T The Adaptec AIC-6915 Programmer's Manual
.%U http://download.adaptec.com/pdfs/user_guides/aic6915_pg.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu .
