.\" Copyright (c) 2011-2016 Solarflare Communications Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"    and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
.\" THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR
.\" CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
.\" EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
.\" PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
.\" OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
.\" OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" The views and conclusions contained in the software and documentation are
.\" those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing official
.\" policies, either expressed or implied, of the FreeBSD Project.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 22, 2015
.Dt SFXGE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sfxge
.Nd "Solarflare 10Gb Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sfxge"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sfxge_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for 10Gb Ethernet adapters based on
Solarflare SFC9000 and XtremeScale X2 family controllers.
The driver supports jumbo
frames, transmit/receive checksum offload, TCP Segmentation Offload
(TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO), VLAN checksum offload, VLAN TSO,
and Receive Side Scaling (RSS) using MSI-X interrupts.
.Pp
The driver allocates 1 receive queue, transmit queue, event queue and
IRQ per CPU up to a maximum of 64.
IRQ affinities should be spread out using
.Xr cpuset 1 .
Interrupt moderation may be controlled through the sysctl
.Va dev.sfxge.%d.int_mod
(units are microseconds).
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
A large number of MAC, PHY and data path statistics are available
under the sysctl
.Va dev.sfxge.%d.stats .
The adapter's VPD
fields including its serial number are available under the sysctl
.Va dev.sfxge.%d.vpd .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports all 10Gb Ethernet adapters based on Solarflare SFC9000
family controllers.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
Actual values can be obtained using
.Xr sysctl 8 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.sfxge.rx_ring
The maximum number of descriptors in a receive queue ring.
Supported values are: 512, 1024, 2048 and 4096.
.It Va hw.sfxge.tx_ring
The maximum number of descriptors in a transmit queue ring.
Supported values are: 512, 1024, 2048 and 4096.
.It Va hw.sfxge.tx_dpl_get_max
The maximum length of the deferred packet
.Dq get-list
for queued transmit packets (TCP and non-TCP), used only if the transmit
queue lock can be acquired.
If a packet is dropped, the
.Va tx_get_overflow
counter is incremented and the local sender receives ENOBUFS.
The value must be greater than 0.
.It Va hw.sfxge.tx_dpl_get_non_tcp_max
The maximum number of non-TCP packets in the deferred packet
.Dq get-list
, used only if the transmit queue lock can be acquired.
If a packet is dropped, the
.Va tx_get_non_tcp_overflow
counter is incremented and the local sender receives ENOBUFS.
The value must be greater than 0.
.It Va hw.sfxge.tx_dpl_put_max
The maximum length of the deferred packet
.Dq put-list
for queued transmit
packets, used if the transmit queue lock cannot be acquired.
If a packet is dropped, the
.Va tx_put_overflow
counter is incremented and the local sender receives ENOBUFS.
The value must be greater than or equal to 0.
.It Va hw.sfxge.tso_fw_assisted
Bitmask to enable/disable usage of FW-assisted TSO version if supported
by NIC firmware.
FATSOv1 (bit 0) and FATSOv2 (bit 1) are supported.
All enabled by default.
.It Va hw.sfxge.N.max_rss_channels
The maximum number of allocated RSS channels for the Nth adapter.
If set to 0 or unset, the number of channels is determined by the number
of CPU cores.
.It Va hw.sfxge.lro.table_size
Size of the LRO hash table.
Must be a power of 2.
A larger table means we can accelerate a larger number of streams.
.It Va hw.sfxge.lro.chain_max
The maximum length of a hash chain.
If chains get too long then the lookup time increases and may exceed
the benefit of LRO.
.It Va hw.sfxge.lro.idle_ticks
The maximum time (in ticks) that a connection can be idle before it's LRO
state is discarded.
.It Va hw.sfxge.lro.slow_start_packets
Number of packets with payload that must arrive in-order before a connection
is eligible for LRO.
The idea is we should avoid coalescing segments when the sender is in
slow-start because reducing the ACK rate can damage performance.
.It Va hw.sfxge.lro.loss_packets
Number of packets with payload that must arrive in-order following loss
before a connection is eligible for LRO.
The idea is we should avoid coalescing segments when the sender is recovering
from loss, because reducing the ACK rate can damage performance.
.It Va hw.sfxge.mcdi_logging
Enable logging of MCDI protocol messages  (only available if enabled at compile-time).
.It Va hw.sfxge.N.mcdi_logging
Enable or disable logging of MCDI protocol messages on a per-port basis.
The default for each port will be the value of
.Va hw.sfxge.mcdi_logging.
The logging may also be enabled or disabled after the driver is loaded using the sysctl
.Va dev.sfxge.%d.mcdi_logging.
.It Va hw.sfxge.stats_update_period_ms
Period in milliseconds to refresh interface statistics from hardware.
The accepted range is 0 to 65535, the default is 1000 (1 second).
Use zero value to disable periodic statistics update.
Supported on SFN8xxx series adapters with firmware v6.2.1.1033 and later and
SFN5xxx, SFN6xxx and XtremeScale X2xxx series adapters.
SFN7xxx series adapters and sfN8xxx series with earlier firmware use a
fixed 1000 milliseconds statistics update period.
The period may also be changed after the driver is loaded using the sysctl
.Va dev.sfxge.%d.stats_update_period_ms .
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Solarflare support website at:
.Pa https://support.solarflare.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cpuset 1 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Philip Paeps
and
.An Solarflare Communications, Inc.
