.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Weongyo Jeong
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 13, 2017
.Dt SIBA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm siba
.Nd Sonic Inc. Silicon Backplane driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, add the following lines to the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device bhnd"
.Cd "device siba"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot, add this line to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
siba_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Xr bhnd 4
support for devices based on the Sonic Inc. Silicon Backplane, an
interblock communications architecture found in earlier Broadcom Home
Networking Division wireless chipsets and embedded systems.
.Pp
A common interconnect connects all of the Silicon Backplane's functional
blocks.
These functional blocks, known as cores, use the Open Core Protocol
(OCP) interface to communicate with agents attached to the Silicon
Backplane.
.Pp
Each core can have an initiator agent that passes read and write
requests onto the system backplane and a target agent that returns
responses to those requests.
Not all cores contain both an initiator and a target agent.
Initiator agents are present in cores that contain
host interfaces (PCI, PCMCIA), embedded processors (MIPS),
or DMA processors associated with communications cores.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bcma 4 ,
.Xr bhnd 4 ,
.Xr intro 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.0 .
The driver was rewritten for
.Fx 11.0
to support the common Broadcom
.Xr bhnd 4
bus interface.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written by
.An Bruce M. Simpson Aq Mt bms@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Weongyo Jeong Aq Mt weongyo@FreeBSD.org .
The driver was rewritten for
.Fx 11.0
by
.An Landon Fuller Aq Mt landonf@FreeBSD.org .
