.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by Semihalf under sponsorship from
.\" the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 12, 2010
.Dt SIMPLEBUS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm simplebus
.Nd ePAPR simple-bus driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options FDT"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This bus driver is dedicated for the
.Pa simple-bus
node of a flattened device tree compliant with the
.Pa ePAPR
specification.
.Pp
The
.Nm
entity does not represent any physical element by itself, it is rather an
umbrella node grouping integrated on-chip peripherals like interrupt
controller, connectivity controllers, accelerating engines and so on.
.Pp
The driver is generic and common for all flattened device tree nodes claiming
.Pa simple-bus
compatibility.
It iterates over direct descendants of the
.Pa simple-bus
node, instantiates newbus children and assigns resources to them, based on the
configuration data retrieved from the nodes properties in
.Xr fdt 4 .
.Pp
Note the
.Nm
does not manage device resources and passes through any requests to the
.Xr fdtbus 4
layer.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fdt 4 ,
.Xr fdtbus 4 ,
.Xr openfirm 4
.Sh STANDARDS
Power.org Standard for Embedded Power Architecture Platform Requirements
.Pq Vt ePAPR .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
support first appeared in
.Fx 9.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
support was developed by Semihalf under sponsorship from the FreeBSD
Foundation.
This manual page was written by
.An Rafal Jaworowski .
