.\"	$OpenBSD: siop.4,v 1.21 2022/02/17 12:24:08 jsg Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: siop.4,v 1.3 2000/10/23 16:38:10 bouyer Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Manuel Bouyer.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 17 2022 $
.Dt SIOP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm siop
.Nd LSI/Symbios Logic/NCR 53c8xx SCSI interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "siop* at pci?"
.Pp
.Cd "# hppa"
.Cd "siop* at mainbus? irq 3"
.Cd "siop* at phantomas? irq 3"
.Cd "siop* at uturn? irq 3"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for following LSI/Symbios Logic/NCR 53c8xx and
related
.Tn SCSI
controller chips:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
53c720 and 53c770 (Fast-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c810, 53c810a and 53c815 (Fast
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c820, 53c825 and 53c825a (Fast-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c860 (Ultra
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c875 and 53c875j (Ultra-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c876 (Dual Ultra-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c885 (Ultra-Wide
.Tn SCSI
and
.Tn Ethernet )
.It
53c895 and 53c895a (Ultra2-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c896 (PCI 64bit, dual Ultra2-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c1010 (PCI 64bit, dual Ultra3-Wide
.Tn SCSI .
.Em NOTE :
at this time
.Nm
supports at most Ultra2-Wide with this chip)
.It
53c1510D (dual Ultra2-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.El
.Pp
.Nm
replaces the older
.Nm ncr
driver which supported most of these devices.
.Pp
Older 53C700 and 53C710 controllers are supported by the
.Xr oosiop 4
and
.Xr osiop 4
drivers, respectively.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr oosiop 4 ,
.Xr osiop 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4 ,
.Xr uk 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 ,
.Ox
support was added in
.Ox 2.9 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Manuel Bouyer Aq Mt Manuel.Bouyer@lip6.fr
for
.Nx .
It was ported to
.Ox
with 53c1010 support added by
.An Ken Westerback Aq Mt krw@openbsd.org
using code from the
.Fx
sym-2 driver written by
.An Gerard Roudier Aq Mt groudier@FreeBSD.org .
