.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ee.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 2, 2010
.Dt SIS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sis
.Nd "SiS 900, SiS 7016 and NS DP83815/DP83816 Fast Ethernet device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device sis"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_sis_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Ethernet adapters and embedded
controllers based on the Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900
and SiS 7016 Fast Ethernet controller chips.
.Pp
This driver also supports
adapters based on the National Semiconductor DP83815 (MacPhyter) and DP83816
PCI Ethernet controller chip.
.Pp
The SiS 900 is a 100Mbps Ethernet MAC and MII-compliant transceiver
in a single package.
It uses a bus master DMA and a scatter/gather
descriptor scheme.
The SiS 7016 is similar to the SiS 900 except
that it has no internal PHY, requiring instead an external transceiver
to be attached to its MII interface.
The SiS 900 and SiS 7016 both have a 128-bit multicast hash filter
and a single perfect filter entry for the station address.
.Pp
The NS DP83815 is also a 100Mbps Ethernet MAC with integrated PHY.
The NatSemi chip and the SiS 900 share many of the same features and
a fairly similar programming interface, hence both chips are supported
by the same driver.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width 10baseTXUTP
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Sq full-duplex
or
.Sq half-duplex
modes.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Sq full-duplex
or
.Sq half-duplex
modes.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width full-duplex
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900 and SiS 7016 based
Fast Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers, as well as Fast Ethernet
adapters based on the National Semiconductor DP83815 (MacPhyter) and DP83816
chips.
Supported adapters include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
@Nifty FNECHARD IFC USUP-TX
.It
MELCO LGY-PCI-TXC
.It
Netgear FA311-TX (DP83815)
.It
Netgear FA312-TX (DP83815)
.It
SiS 630, 635, and 735 motherboard chipsets
.It
Soekris Engineering net45xx, net48xx, lan1621, and lan1641
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variable is available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variable and
.Xr loader 8
tunable:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.sis.%unit.manual_pad
This variable controls how to pad short frames for DP83815/DP83816
controllers on the specified device.
DP83815/DP83816 controllers are known to pad 0xFF for short frames
which is violation of RFC 1042.
Set this variable to a non-zero value to let driver manually pad
each short frame with zeros at the cost of extra CPU cycles.
The default value is 0 to let hardware perform automatic padding.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "sis%d: couldn't map ports/memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "sis%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "sis%d: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (e.g.\& a cable fault).
.It "sis%d: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.It "sis%d: no memory for tx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the transmitter ring when
allocating a pad buffer or collapsing an mbuf chain into a cluster.
.It "sis%d: chip is in D3 power state -- setting to D0"
This message applies only to adapters which support power
management.
Some operating systems place the controller in low power
mode when shutting down, and some PCI BIOSes fail to bring the chip
out of this state before configuring it.
The controller loses all of
its PCI configuration in the D3 state, so if the BIOS does not set
it back to full power mode in time, it will not be able to configure it
correctly.
The driver tries to detect this condition and bring
the adapter back to the D0 (full power) state, but this may not be
enough to return the driver to a fully operational condition.
If
you see this message at boot time and the driver fails to attach
the device as a network interface, you will have to perform a
warm boot to have the device properly configured.
.Pp
Note that this condition only occurs when warm booting from another
operating system.
If you power down your system prior to booting
.Fx ,
the card should be configured correctly.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T SiS 900 and SiS 7016 datasheets
.%U http://www.sis.com.tw
.Re
.Rs
.%T NatSemi DP83815 datasheet
.%U http://www.national.com
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ee.columbia.edu .
