.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 29, 2012
.Dt SK 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sk
.Nd "SysKonnect SK-984x and SK-982x PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device sk"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_sk_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the SysKonnect SK-984x and SK-982x series PCI
Gigabit Ethernet adapters.
.Pp
The SysKonnect adapters consist of two main components: the XaQti Corp.
XMAC II gigabit MAC and the SysKonnect GEnesis controller ASIC.
The
XMAC provides the gigabit MAC and PHY support while the GEnesis
provides an interface to the PCI bus, DMA support, packet buffering
and arbitration.
The GEnesis can control up to two XMACs simultaneously,
allowing dual-port NIC configurations.
.Pp
The SK-982x 1000baseT adapters also include a Broadcom BCM5400 1000baseTX
PHY which is used in place of the XMAC's internal PHY.
The Broadcom PHY is connected to the XMAC via its GMII port.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver configures dual port SysKonnect adapters such that each XMAC
is treated as a separate logical network interface.
Both ports can
operate independently of each other and can be connected to separate
networks.
The SysKonnect driver software currently only uses the
second port on dual port adapters for failover purposes: if the link
on the primary port fails, the SysKonnect driver will automatically
switch traffic onto the second port.
.Pp
Also supported is the Marvell Semiconductor 88E100* gigabit PHY.
.Pp
The XaQti XMAC II supports full and half duplex operation with
autonegotiation.
The XMAC also supports unlimited frame sizes.
Support for jumbo frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit jumbo frames.
Using jumbo frames can greatly improve performance for certain tasks,
such as file transfers and data streaming.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It 1000baseTX
Set 1000baseTX operation over twisted pair.
This is only available
for SK-982x series adapters with 1000baseT ports.
Both
.Ar full-duplex
and
.Ar half-duplex
modes are supported.
.It 1000baseSX
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
Both
.Ar full-duplex
and
.Ar half-duplex
modes are supported.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
Adapters supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3Com 3C940 single port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
3Com 3C2000-T single port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
Belkin F5D5005 single port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
D-Link DGE-530T single port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
Linksys (revision 2) single port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
SK-9521 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
SK-9821 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
SK-9822 SK-NET GE-T dual port, 1000baseT adapter
.It
SK-9841 SK-NET GE-LX single port, single mode fiber adapter
.It
SK-9842 SK-NET GE-LX dual port, single mode fiber adapter
.It
SK-9843 SK-NET GE-SX single port, multimode fiber adapter
.It
SK-9844 SK-NET GE-SX dual port, multimode fiber adapter
.It
SMC 9452TX single port, 1000baseT adapter
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxx
.It Va hw.skc.jumbo_disable
Disable jumbo frame support.
Systems with less memory can set it to a non-zero value to save memory.
The default value is 0.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variable is available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variable and
.Xr loader 8
tunable:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxx
.It Va dev.skc.%d.int_mod
This variable controls interrupt moderation.
The accepted range is 10 to 10000.
The default value is 100 microseconds.
The interface has to be brought down and up again before a change takes effect.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "sk%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "sk%d: couldn't map ports"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "sk%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "sk%d: no memory for softc struct!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for per-device instance information
during initialization.
.It "sk%d: failed to enable memory mapping!"
The driver failed to initialize PCI shared memory mapping.
This might
happen if the card is not in a bus-master slot.
.It "sk%d: no memory for jumbo buffers!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for jumbo frames during
initialization.
.It "sk%d: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T XaQti XMAC II datasheet
.%U http://people.freebsd.org/~wpaul/SysKonnect/xmacii_datasheet_rev_c_9-29.pdf
.Re
.Rs
.%T SysKonnect GEnesis programming manual
.%U http://www.syskonnect.com
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu .
