.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Murthy Bhat
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$ stable/10/share/man/man4/smartpqi.4 195614 2017-01-11 08:10:18Z jkim $
.Dd April 6, 2018
.Dt SMARTPQI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm smartpqi
.Nd Microsemi smartpqi SCSI driver for PQI controllers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd device pci
.Cd device scbus
.Cd device smartpqi
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
smartpqi_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
SCSI driver provides support for the new generation of PQI controllers from
Microsemi.
The
.Nm
driver is the first SCSI driver to implement the PQI queuing model.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver will replace the aacraid driver for Adaptec Series 9 controllers.
.Pp
The
.Pa /dev/smartpqi?
device nodes provide access to the management interface of the controller.
One node exists per installed card.
.Sh HARDWARE
Controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
HPE Gen10 Smart Array Controller Family
.It
OEM Controllers based on the Microsemi Chipset  
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /boot/kernel/aac.ko -compact
.It Pa /dev/smartpqi?
smartpqi management interface
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kld 4 ,
.Xr linux 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr kldload 8 ,
.Xr pass 4 ,
.Xr xpt 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.Rs
.%T "Microsemi Website"
.%U http://www.microsemi.com/
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Murthy Bhat
.Aq murthy.bhat@microsemi.com
.Sh BUGS
The controller is not actually paused on suspend/resume.
