.\" Copyright (c) 1998, Nicolas Souchu
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Joerg Wunsch
.\" Copyright (c) 2015, Michael Gmelin <freebsd@grem.de>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 25, 2015
.Dt SMB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm smb
.Nd SMB generic I/O device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device smb"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Em smb
character device driver provides generic I/O to any
.Xr smbus 4
instance.
To control SMB devices, use
.Pa /dev/smb?
with the ioctls described below.
Any of these ioctl commands takes a pointer to
.Vt struct smbcmd
as its argument.
.Bd -literal
#include <sys/types.h>

struct smbcmd {
	u_char cmd;
	u_char reserved;
	u_short op;
	union {
		char    byte;
		char    buf[2];
		short   word;
	} wdata;
	union {
		char    byte;
		char    buf[2];
		short   word;
	} rdata;
	int  slave;
	char *wbuf;     /* use wdata if NULL */
	int  wcount;
	char *rbuf;     /* use rdata if NULL */
	int  rcount;
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa slave
field is always used, and provides the address of the
SMBus slave device.
The slave address is specified in the seven most significant bits
.Pq i.e., Dq "left-justified" .
The least significant bit of the slave address must be zero.
.Pp
.Bl -column ".Dv SMB_QUICK_WRITE" -compact
.It Em Ioctl Ta Em Description
.Pp
.It Dv SMB_QUICK_WRITE Ta
.Em QuickWrite
does not transfer any data.
It just issues the device address with write intent to the bus.
.It Dv SMB_QUICK_READ Ta
.Em QuickRead
does not transfer any data.
It just issues the device address with read intent to the bus.
.It Dv SMB_SENDB Ta
.Em SendByte
sends the byte provided in
.Fa cmd
to the device.
.It Dv SMB_RECVB Ta
.Em ReceiveByte
reads a single byte from the device which is returned in
.Fa cmd .
.It Dv SMB_WRITEB Ta
.Em WriteByte
first sends the byte from
.Fa cmd
to the device, followed by the byte given in
.Fa wdata.byte .
.It Dv SMB_WRITEW Ta
.Em WriteWord
first sends the byte from
.Fa cmd
to the device, followed by the word given in
.Fa wdata.word .
Note that the SMBus byte-order is little-endian by definition.
.It Dv SMB_READB Ta
.Em ReadByte
first sends the byte from
.Fa cmd
to the device, then reads one byte of data from
the device.
Returned data is stored in
.Fa rdata.byte .
.It Dv SMB_READW Ta
.Em ReadWord
first sends the byte from
.Fa cmd
to the device, then reads one word of data from
the device.
Returned data is stored in
.Fa rdata.word .
.It Dv SMB_PCALL Ta
.Em ProcedureCall
first sends the byte from
.Fa cmd
to the device, followed by the word provided in
.Fa wdata.word .
It then reads one word of data from the device and returns it
in
.Fa rdata.word .
.It Dv SMB_BWRITE Ta
.Em BlockWrite
first sends the byte from
.Fa cmd
to the device, then the byte from
.Fa wcount
followed by
.Fa wcount
bytes of data that are taken from the buffer pointed to by
.Fa wbuf .
The SMBus specification mandates that no more than 32 bytes of
data can be transferred in a single block read or write command.
This value can be read from the constant
.Dv SMB_MAXBLOCKSIZE .
.It Dv SMB_BREAD Ta
.Em BlockRead
first sends the byte from
.Fa cmd
to the device, then reads a count of data bytes that the device
is going to provide and then reads that many bytes.
The count is returned in
.Fa rcount.
The data is returned in the buffer pointed to by
.Fa rbuf .
.El
.Pp
The
.Xr read 2
and
.Xr write 2
system calls are not implemented by this driver.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Xr ioctl 2
commands can cause the following driver-specific errors:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENXIO
Device did not respond to selection.
.It Bq Er EBUSY
Device still in use.
.It Bq Er ENODEV
Operation not supported by device (not supposed to happen).
.It Bq Er EINVAL
General argument error.
.It Bq Er EWOULDBLOCK
SMBus transaction timed out.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr smbus 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This
manual page was written by
.An Nicolas Souchu
and extended by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq freebsd@grem.de .
