.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 M. Warner Losh
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2018
.Dt SN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sn
.Nd "Ethernet driver for SMC91Cxx based cards"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sn"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_sn_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports SMC91Cxx based ISA and PCMCIA cards.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports SMC91Cxx based ISA and PCMCIA cards including:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3Com Megahertz X-Jack Ethernet PC Card XJ10BT, XJ10BC
.It
3Com Megahertz XJEM and CCEM series: CCEM3288C, CCEM3288T, CCEM3336,
CEM3336C, CCEM3336T, XJEM1144C, XJEM1144T, XJEM3288C, XJEM3288T, XJEM3336
.It
Farallon EtherMac PC Card 595a
.It
Motorola Mariner Ethernet/Modem PC Card
.It
Ositech Seven of Diamonds Ethernet PC Card
.It
Ositech Jack of Hearts Ethernet/Modem PC Card
.It
Psion Gold Card Netglobal Ethernet PC Card
.It
Psion Gold Card Netglobal 10/100 Fast Ethernet PC Card
.It
Psion Gold Card Netglobal 56k+10Mb Ethernet PC Card
.It
SMC EZEther PC Card (8020BT)
.It
SMC EZEther PC Card (8020T)
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the SMC 91C90, SMC 91C92, SMC 91C94, SMC 91C95, SMC 91C96,
SMC91C100 and SMC 91C100FD chips from SMC.
.Pp
The Farallon EtherWave and EtherMac card came in two varieties.
The
.Xr ep 4
driver supports the 595 and 895 cards.
These cards have the blue arrow on the front along with a 3Com logo.
The Farallon 595a cards, which have a red arrow on the front,
are also called EtherWave and EtherMac.
They are supported by the
.Nm
driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ed 4 ,
.Xr ep 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vx 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
