.\" Copyright (c) 2006-2008 Joel Dahl <joel@FreeBSD.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 1, 2018
.Dt SND_HDA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snd_hda
.Nd "Intel High Definition Audio bridge device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sound"
.Cd "device snd_hda"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
snd_hda_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The High Definition (HD) Audio specification was developed by Intel as the
logical successor of the old AC'97 specification and has several advantages,
such as higher bandwidth which allows more channels and more detailed formats,
support for several logical audio devices, and general purpose DMA channels.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver includes HDA bus controller driver (hdac), HDA codec driver (hdacc)
and HDA codecs audio functions bridge driver (hdaa) that allows
the generic audio driver,
.Xr sound 4 ,
to be used with this hardware.
Only audio functions are supported by
.Nm .
Modem and other possible functions are not implemented.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports hardware that conforms with revision 1.0 of the Intel High
Definition Audio specification and tries to behave much like the Microsoft
Universal Audio Architecture (UAA) draft (revision 0.7b) for handling audio
devices.
.Pp
According to HDA and UAA specifications, depending on the number of HDA buses
and codecs present in system, their audio capabilities and BIOS provided
configuration, the
.Nm
driver often provides several PCM audio devices.
For example, one device for main rear 7.1 output and inputs, one device
for independent headset connectors at front and one device for SPDIF or
HDMI audio input/output.
The assignment of audio inputs and outputs may be tuned with
.Xr device.hints 5
or
.Xr sysctl 8 .
The driver's verbose boot messages provide a lot of information about
the operation of the driver and present audio setup.
.Pp
The default audio device may be tuned by setting the
.Ar hw.snd.default_unit
sysctl, as described in
.Xr sound 4 ,
or explicitly specified in application settings.
.Ss Boot-time Configuration
The following variables are available at boot-time through the
.Xr device.hints 5
file:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va hint.hdac.%d.config"-offset indent
.It Va hint.hdac.%d.config
Configures a range of possible controller options.
Possible values are:
.Dq Li 64bit ,
.Dq Li dmapos ,
.Dq Li msi .
An option prefixed with
.Dq Li no ,
such as
.Dq Li nomsi ,
will do the opposite and takes precedence.
Options can be separated by whitespace and commas.
.It Va hint.hdac.%d.msi
Controls MSI (Message Signaled Interrupts) support.
.It Va hint.hdac.%d.cad%d.nid%d.config
Same as
.Va hint.hdaa.%d.nid%d.config
.It Va hint.hdaa.%d.config
Configures a range of possible audio function options.
Possible values are:
.Dq Li eapdinv ,
.Dq Li ivref ,
.Dq Li ivref50 ,
.Dq Li ivref80 ,
.Dq Li ivref100 ,
.Dq Li fixedrate ,
.Dq Li forcestereo ,
.Dq Li ovref ,
.Dq Li ovref50 ,
.Dq Li ovref80 ,
.Dq Li ovref100 ,
.Dq Li senseinv ,
.Dq Li softpcmvol ,
and
.Dq Li vref .
An option prefixed with
.Dq Li no ,
such as
.Dq Li nofixedrate ,
will do the opposite and takes precedence.
Options can be separated by whitespace and commas.
.Pp
The
.Dq Li eapdinv
option inverts External Amplifier Power Down signal.
The
.Dq Li fixedrate
denies all sampling rates except 48KHz.
The
.Dq Li forcestereo
denies mono playback/recording.
The
.Dq Li senseinv
option inverts jack sensing logic.
The
.Dq Li ivref Ns Ar X
and
.Dq Li ovref Ns Ar X
options control the voltage used to power external microphones.
.It Va hint.hdaa.%d.gpio_config
Overrides audio function GPIO pins configuration set by BIOS.
May be specified as a set of space-separated
.Dq Ar num Ns = Ns Ar value
pairs, where
.Ar num
is GPIO line number, and
.Ar value
is one of:
.Dq Li keep ,
.Dq Li set ,
.Dq Li clear ,
.Dq Li disable
and
.Dq Li input .
.Pp
.Dq Li GPIO Ns s
are a codec's General Purpose I/O pins which system integrators sometimes
use to control external muters, amplifiers and so on.
If you have no sound, or sound volume is not adequate, you may have to
experiment a bit with the GPIO setup to find the optimal setup for your
system.
.It Va hint.hdaa.%d.nid%d.config
Overrides audio function pin configuration set by BIOS.
May be specified as a 32-bit hexadecimal value with a leading
.Dq 0x ,
or as a set of space-separated
.Dq Ar option Ns = Ns Ar value
pairs.
.It Va hint.pcm.%d.rec.autosrc
Controls automatic recording source feature:
.Bl -tag -width 2n -compact
.It 0
disabled,
.It 1
once on attach,
.It 2
enabled.
.El
When enabled, driver will automatically set recording source of the mixer to
connected input using jack presence detection statuses.
.El
.Pp
Pin configuration is the UAA driver's main source of information about codec
usage.
This information is usually provided by the codec manufacturer and tuned
by system integrators for specific system requirements.
The
.Nm
driver allows users to override it to fix integrator mistakes or to use the
available codec in alternative ways (for example to get stereo output and 2
inputs instead of a single 5.1 output).
.Pp
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va device=" -offset indent
.It Va as
Association number.
Associations are used to group individual pins to form a complex multi-pin
device.
For example, to group 4 connectors for 7.1 input/output, or to treat several
input connectors as sources for the same input device.
Association numbers can be specified as numeric values from 0 to 15.
A value of 0 means disabled pin.
A value of 15 is a set of independent unassociated pins.
Each association includes only pins of the same direction (in/out) and is
detected atomically (all pins or none).
A separate PCM audio device is created for every pair of input and
output associations.
.It Va seq
Sequence number.
A unique, per-association number used to order pins inside the
particular association.
Sequence numbers can be specified as numeric values from 0 to 15.
.Pp
The sequence number 15 has a special meaning for output associations.
Output pins with this number and device type
.Dq Ar Headphones
will duplicate (with automatic mute if jack detection is supported) the
first pin in that association.
.Pp
The sequence numbers 14 and 15 has a special meaning for input associations.
Their presence in association defines it as multiplexed or mixed respectively.
If none of them are present and there are more than one pin in association,
the association will provide multichannel input.
.Pp
For multichannel input/output associations sequence numbers encode
channel pairs positions:
0 - Front, 1 - Center/LFE, 2 - Back, 3 - Front Wide Center, 4 - Side.
Standard combinations are: (0) - Stereo; (0, 2), (0, 4) - Quadro;
(0, 1, 2), (0, 1, 4) - 5.1; (0, 1, 2, 4) - 7.1.
.It Va device
Device type.
Can be specified as a number from 0 to 15 or as a name:
.Dq Li Line-out ,
.Dq Li Speaker ,
.Dq Li Headphones,
.Dq Li CD ,
.Dq Li SPDIF-out ,
.Dq Li Digital-out ,
.Dq Li Modem-line ,
.Dq Li Modem-handset ,
.Dq Li Line-in ,
.Dq Li AUX ,
.Dq Li Mic ,
.Dq Li Telephony ,
.Dq Li SPDIF-in ,
.Dq Li Digital-in ,
.Dq Li Res.E ,
or
.Dq Li Other .
The device type also describes the pin direction (in/out).
For example,
.Dq Li CD
always means an input pin, while
.Dq Li Headphones
always means an output.
.It Va conn
Connection type.
Can be specified as a number from 0 to 3.
The connection type can also be specified as one of the special names
.Dq Li Jack ,
.Dq Li None ,
.Dq Li Fixed ,
or
.Dq Li Both .
Pins with a connection type of
.Dq Li None
are disabled.
.It Va ctype
Connector physical type.
Can be specified as a number from 0 to 15.
This is a reference only value.
It is ignored by the
.Nm
driver.
.It Va color
Connector color.
Can be specified as a number from 0 to 15 or as one of the names
.Dq Li Unknown ,
.Dq Li Black ,
.Dq Li Grey ,
.Dq Li Blue ,
.Dq Li Green ,
.Dq Li Red ,
.Dq Li Orange ,
.Dq Li Yellow ,
.Dq Li Purple ,
.Dq Li Pink ,
.Dq Li Res.A ,
.Dq Li Res.B ,
.Dq Li Res.C ,
.Dq Li Res.D ,
.Dq Li White ,
or
.Dq Li Other .
This is a reference only value.
It is ignored by the
.Nm
driver.
.It Va loc
Connector physical location.
Can be specified as a number from 0 to 63.
This is a reference only value.
It is ignored by the
.Nm
driver.
.It Va misc
Misc bits.
Can be specified as a number from 0 to 15.
Bit 0 has a special meaning.
When set it means that jack detection is not implemented in hardware.
.El
.Ss Runtime Configuration
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available in addition to those available to all
.Xr sound 4
devices:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va dev.hdaa.%d.nid%d_original" -offset indent
.It Va dev.hdac.%d.pindump
Setting this to a non-zero value dumps the current pin configuration, main
capabilities and jack sense status of all audio functions on the controller
to console and syslog.
.It Va dev.hdac.%d.polling
Enables polling mode.
In this mode the driver operates by querying the device state on timer
ticks using
.Xr callout 9
instead of interrupts.
Polling is disabled by default.
Do not enable it unless you are facing weird interrupt problems or if the
device cannot generate interrupts at all.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.config
Run-time equivalent of the
.Va hint.hdaa.%d.config
tunable.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.gpi_state
Current state of GPI lines.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.gpio_state
Current state of GPIO lines.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.gpio_config
Run-time equivalent of the
.Va hint.hdaa.%d.gpio.config
tunable.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.gpo_state
Current state of GPO lines.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.nid%d_config
Run-time equivalent of the
.Va hint.hdaa.%d.nid%d.config
tunable.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.nid%d_original
Original pin configuration written by BIOS.
.It Va dev.hdaa.%d.reconfig
Setting this to a non-zero value makes driver to destroy existing pcm devices
and process new pins configuration set via
.Va dev.hdaa.%d.nid%d_config .
.It Va dev.pcm.%d.play.32bit , dev.pcm.%d.rec.32bit
HDA controller uses 32bit representation for all samples of more then 16 bits.
These variables allow to specify how many bits of these 32 should be
used by CODEC.
Depending on codec capabilities, possible values are 20, 24 and 32 bit.
The default value is 24.
.It Va dev.pcm.%d.rec.autosrc
Run-time equivalent of the
.Va hint.pcm.%d.rec.autosrc
tunable.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Taking HP Compaq DX2300 with Realtek ALC888 HDA codec for example.
This system has two audio connectors on a front side, three audio connectors
on a rear side and one internal speaker.
According to verbose driver output and the codec datasheet,
this codec has five stereo DACs and two stereo ADCs, all of them are routable to
any codec pin (external connector).
All codec pins are reversible (could be configured either as input or output).
.Pp
So high codec uniformity and flexibility allow driver to configure it in many
different ways, depending on requested pins usage described by pins configuration.
The driver reports such default pin configuration when verbose messages enabled:
.Bd -literal
hdaa0: nid   0x    as seq device       conn  jack    loc        color   misc
hdaa0: 20 01014020 2  0  Line-out      Jack  1/8     Rear       Green   0
hdaa0: 21 99130110 1  0  Speaker       Fixed ATAPI   Onboard    Unknown 1
hdaa0: 22 411111f0 15 0  Speaker       None  1/8     Rear       Black   1 DISA
hdaa0: 23 411111f0 15 0  Speaker       None  1/8     Rear       Black   1 DISA
hdaa0: 24 01a19830 3  0  Mic           Jack  1/8     Rear       Pink    8
hdaa0: 25 02a1983f 3  15 Mic           Jack  1/8     Front      Pink    8
hdaa0: 26 01813031 3  1  Line-in       Jack  1/8     Rear       Blue    0
hdaa0: 27 0221401f 1  15 Headphones    Jack  1/8     Front      Green   0
hdaa0: 28 411111f0 15 0  Speaker       None  1/8     Rear       Black   1 DISA
hdaa0: 30 411111f0 15 0  Speaker       None  1/8     Rear       Black   1 DISA
hdaa0: 31 411111f0 15 0  Speaker       None  1/8     Rear       Black   1 DISA
.Ed
.Pp
Here we can see, that the nodes with ID (nid) 25 and 27 are front panel
connectors (Jack, Front), nids 20, 24 and 26 are rear panel connectors
(Jack, Rear) and nid 21 is a built-in speaker (Fixed, Onboard).
Pins with nids 22, 23, 28, 30 and 31 will be disabled by driver due to "None"
connectivity.
So the pin count and description matches to connectors that we have.
.Pp
Using association (as) and sequence (seq) fields values pins are grouped into
3 associations:
.Bd -literal
hdaa0: Association 0 (1) out:
hdaa0:   Pin nid=21 seq=0
hdaa0:   Pin nid=27 seq=15
hdaa0: Association 1 (2) out:
hdaa0:   Pin nid=20 seq=0
hdaa0: Association 2 (3) in:
hdaa0:   Pin nid=24 seq=0
hdaa0:   Pin nid=26 seq=1
hdaa0:   Pin nid=25 seq=15
.Ed
.Pp
Each
.Xr pcm 4
device uses two associations: one for playback and one for recording.
Associations processed and assigned to
.Xr pcm 4
devices in increasing numerical order.
In this case association #0 (1) will become
.Li pcm0
device playback, using the internal speakers and
.Ar Headphones
jack with speaker automute on the headphones jack connection.
Association #1 (2) will become
.Li pcm1
playback, using the
.Ar Line-out
jack.
Association #2 (3) will become
.Li pcm0
recording, using the external microphones and the
.Ar Line-in
jack.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver provides extensive verbose messages to diagnose its operation
logic and describe its current codec configuration.
.Pp
Using
.Xr device.hints 5
it is possible to modify the configuration of the existing pins,
allowing a broad range of different audio setups.
Here are a few examples of some setups possible for this particular
hardware:
.Ss Example 1
Setting the
.Xr device.hints 5
options
.Bd -literal
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid20.config="as=1"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid21.config="as=2"
.Ed
.Pp
will swap line-out and speaker functions.
So the
.Li pcm0
device will play to the line-out and headphones jacks.
Line-out will be muted on the headphones jack connection.
Recording on
.Li pcm0
will go from two external microphones and line-in jacks.
.Li pcm1
playback will go to the internal speaker.
.Ss Example 2
Setting the
.Xr device.hints 5
options
.Bd -literal
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid20.config="as=1 seq=15 device=Headphones"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid27.config="as=2 seq=0"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid25.config="as=4 seq=0"
.Ed
.Pp
will split the headphones and one of the microphones to a separate device.
The
.Li pcm0
device will play to the internal speaker and to the line-out jack, with
speaker automute on the line-out jack connection.
Recording on
.Li pcm0
will use input from one external microphone and the line-in jacks.
The
.Li pcm1
device will be completely dedicated to a headset (headphones and mic)
connected to the front connectors.
.Ss Example 3
Setting the
.Xr device.hints 5
options
.Bd -literal
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid20.config="as=1 seq=0"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid26.config="as=2 seq=0"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid27.config="as=3 seq=0"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid25.config="as=4 seq=0"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid24.config="as=5 seq=0 device=Line-out"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid21.config="as=6 seq=0"
.Ed
.Pp
will give 4 independent devices:
.Li pcm0
.Pq line-out and line-in ,
.Li pcm1
.Pq headphones and mic ,
.Li pcm2
.Pq additional line-out via retasked rear mic jack ,
and
.Li pcm3
.Pq internal speaker .
.Ss Example 4
Setting the
.Xr device.hints 5
options
.Bd -literal
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid20.config="as=1 seq=0"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid24.config="as=1 seq=1 device=Line-out"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid26.config="as=1 seq=2 device=Line-out"
hint.hdac.0.cad0.nid21.config="as=2 seq=0"
.Ed
.Pp
will give 2 devices:
.Li pcm0
for 5.1 playback via 3 rear connectors (line-out and retasked
mic and line-in) and headset (headphones and mic) at front connectors.
.Li pcm1
for internal speaker playback.
On headphones connection rear connectors will be muted.
.Sh MIXER CONTROLS
Depending on codec configuration, these controls and signal sources could be
reported to
.Xr sound 4 :
.Bl -tag -width ".Va speaker" -offset indent
.It Va vol
overall output level (volume)
.It Va rec
overall recording level
.It Va igain
input-to-output monitoring loopback level
.It Va ogain
external amplifier control
.It Va pcm
PCM playback
.It Va mix
input mix
.It Va mic
first external or second internal microphone input
.It Va monitor
first internal or second external microphone input
.It Va line , Va line1 , Va line2 , Va line3
analog (line) inputs
.It Va dig1 , Va dig2 , Va dig3
digital (S/PDIF, HDMI or DisplayPort) inputs
.It Va cd
CD input
.It Va speaker
PC speaker input
.It Va phin , Va phout , Va radio , Va video
other random inputs
.El
.Pp
Controls have different precision.
Some could be just an on/off triggers.
Most of controls use logarithmic scale.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports controllers having PCI class 4 (multimedia) and
subclass 3 (HDA), compatible with Intel HDA specification.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports more than two hundred different controllers and CODECs.
There is no sense to list all of them here, as in most cases specific CODEC
configuration and wiring are more important then type of the CODEC itself.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr snd_ich 4 ,
.Xr sound 4 ,
.Xr device.hints 5 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Stephane E. Potvin Aq Mt sepotvin@videotron.ca ,
.An Ariff Abdullah Aq Mt ariff@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Alexander Motin Aq Mt mav@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Joel Dahl Aq Mt joel@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Alexander Motin Aq Mt mav@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Giorgos Keramidas Aq Mt keramida@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
Some Hardware/OEM vendors tend to screw up BIOS settings or use custom
unusual CODEC wiring that create problems to the driver.
This may result in missing pcm devices, or a state where the
.Nm
driver seems to attach and work, but no sound is played.
Some cases can be solved by tuning
.Pa loader.conf
variables.
But before trying to fix problem that way, make sure that there really is
a problem and that the PCM audio device in use really corresponds to the
expected audio connector.
.Pp
Some vendors use non-standardized General Purpose I/O (GPIO) pins of the codec
to control external amplifiers.
In some cases setting a combination of GPIO bits may be needed to make
sound work on a specific device.
.Pp
HDMI and DisplayPort audio may also require support from video driver.
