.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Seigo Tanimura
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 17, 2007
.Dt SND_SBC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snd_sbc ,
.Nm snd_sb16 ,
.Nm snd_sb8
.Nd Creative Sound Blaster ISA and compatible bridge device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sound"
.Cd "device snd_sbc"
.Cd "device snd_sb16"
.Cd "device snd_sb8"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
snd_sbc_load="YES"
snd_sb16_load="YES"
snd_sb8_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
Non-PnP cards require the following lines in
.Xr device.hints 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hint.sbc.0.at="isa"
hint.sbc.0.port="0x220"
hint.sbc.0.irq="5"
hint.sbc.0.drq="1"
hint.sbc.0.flags="0x15"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
bridge driver allows the generic audio driver
.Xr sound 4
to attach to Creative Sound Blaster ISA (mostly SB16 or SB8, known as
SoundBlaster Pro) compatible audio cards.
.Pp
The value of flags specifies the secondary DMA channel.
If the secondary
DMA channel is C, set the flags to (C | 0x10).
For a sound card without the
secondary DMA channel, the flags should be set to zero.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following sound cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Avance Asound 110
.It
Avance Logic ALS100+
.It
Avance Logic ALS120
.It
Creative SB16
.It
Creative SB32
.It
Creative AWE64
.It
Creative AWE64 Gold
.It
Creative ViBRA16C
.It
Creative ViBRA16X
.It
ESS ES1681
.It
ESS ES1688
.It
ESS ES1868
.It
ESS ES1869
.It
ESS ES1878
.It
ESS ES1879
.It
ESS ES1888
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It sb_dspwr(XX) timed out.
A command to the DSP has timed out.
Check the I/O port configuration.
.It bad irq XX (5/7/9/10 valid)
The IRQ given to the driver is not valid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sound 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Seigo Tanimura Aq Mt tanimura@r.dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
