.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Atte Peltomaki
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 29, 2006
.Dt SND_ES137X 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snd_es137x
.Nd "Ensoniq AudioPCI ES137x bridge device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sound"
.Cd "device snd_es137x"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
snd_es137x_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
bridge driver allows the generic audio driver
.Xr sound 4
to attach to the Ensoniq 137x audio cards.
.Ss Runtime Configuration
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available in addition to those available to all
.Xr sound 4
devices:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va hw.snd.pcm%d.latency_timer" -offset indent
.It Va hw.snd.pcm%d.latency_timer
Controls the PCI latency timer setting.
Increasing this value will solve most popping and crackling issues
(especially on VIA motherboards).
.It Va hw.snd.pcm%d.spdif_enabled
Enables S/PDIF output on the primary playback channel.
This
.Xr sysctl 8
variable is available only if the device is known to support S/PDIF output.
.It Va dev.pcm.%d.polling
Experimental polling mode, where the driver operates by querying the device
state on each tick using
.Xr callout 9 .
Polling is disabled by default.
Do not enable it unless you are facing weird interrupt problems or if the
device cannot generate interrupts at all.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following sound cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Creative CT5880-A
.It
Creative CT5880-C
.It
Creative CT5880-D
.It
Creative CT5880-E
.It
Creative SB AudioPCI CT4730
.It
Ensoniq AudioPCI ES1370
.It
Ensoniq AudioPCI ES1371-A
.It
Ensoniq AudioPCI ES1371-B
.It
Ensoniq AudioPCI ES1373-A
.It
Ensoniq AudioPCI ES1373-B
.It
Ensoniq AudioPCI ES1373-8
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sound 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Russell Cattelan Aq Mt cattelan@thebarn.com
.An Cameron Grant Aq Mt cg@FreeBSD.org
.An Joachim Kuebart
.An Jonathan Noack Aq Mt noackjr@alumni.rice.edu
