.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Seigo Tanimura
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 15, 2005
.Dt SND_CSA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snd_csa
.Nd Crystal Semiconductor CS461x/462x/4280 PCI bridge device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sound"
.Cd "device snd_csa"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
snd_csa_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
bridge driver allows the generic audio driver
.Xr sound 4
to attach to Crystal Semiconductor CS461x/462x/4280 based sound cards.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following sound cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4280
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4610
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4611
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4614
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4615
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4622
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4624
.It
Crystal Semiconductor CS4630
.It
Genius Soundmaker 128 Value
.It
Hercules Game Theatre XP
.It
Turtle Beach Santa Cruz
.El
.Pp
Some onboard CS4610 chips are accompanied by the CS423x ISA codec
instead of the CS4297 AC97 codec.
Such configurations are not
supported by the
.Nm
driver yet.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sound 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Seigo Tanimura Aq Mt tanimura@r.dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
