.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Seigo Tanimura
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 15, 2005
.Dt SND_GUSC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snd_gusc
.Nd Gravis UltraSound ISA bridge device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sound"
.Cd "device snd_gusc"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
snd_gusc_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
Non-PnP cards require the following lines in
.Xr device.hints 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hint.gusc.0.at="isa"
hint.gusc.0.port="0x220"
hint.gusc.0.irq="5"
hint.gusc.0.drq="1"
hint.gusc.0.flags="0x13"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
bridge driver allows the generic audio driver
.Xr sound 4
to attach to Gravis UltraSound sound cards.
.Pp
The value of flags specifies the secondary DMA channel.
If the secondary
DMA channel is C, set the flags to (C | 0x10).
For a sound card without the
secondary DMA channel, the flags should be set to zero.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following sound cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Gravis UltraSound MAX
.It
Gravis UltraSound PnP
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It xxx: gus pcm not attached, out of memory
There are not enough memory to drive the device.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sound 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Ville-Pertti Keinonen Aq Mt will@iki.fi
.An Seigo Tanimura Aq Mt tanimura@r.dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
.Sh BUGS
Recording pcm sound data is not supported yet.
