.\"	$NetBSD: stge.4,v 1.7 2003/02/14 15:20:20 grant Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jason R. Thorpe.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 23, 2010
.Dt STGE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm stge
.Nd Sundance/Tamarack TC9021 Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device stge"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_stge_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for various NICs based on the
Sundance/Tamarack TC9021 Gigabit Ethernet controller chip.
.Pp
The Sundance/Tamarack TC9021 is found on the D-Link DGE-550T
and the Antares Microsystems Gigabit Ethernet board.
It uses an external PHY or an external 10-bit interface.
.Pp
All NICs supported by the
.Nm
driver have TCP/UDP/IP checksum offload for both receive and
transmit, hardware VLAN tag stripping/insertion features, and
receive interrupt moderation mechanism as well as a 64-bit
multicast hash filter.
The Sundance/Tamarack TC9021 supports TBI (ten bit interface)
and GMII transceivers, which means it can be used with either
copper or 1000baseX fiber applications.
.Pp
The Sundance/Tamarack TC9021 also supports jumbo frames, which can be
configured via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit jumbo frames.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseTX
Set 1000baseTX operation over twisted pair.
The Sundance/Tamarack supports 1000Mbps in
.Cm autoselect
mode only.
.\" .It Cm 1000baseSX
.\" Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
.\" Both
.\" .Cm full-duplex
.\" and
.\" .Cm half-duplex
.\" modes are supported.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various NICs based on the Sundance/Tamarack
TC9021 based Gigabit Ethernet controller chips, including:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Antares Microsystems Gigabit Ethernet
.It
ASUS NX1101 Gigabit Ethernet
.It
D-Link DL-4000 Gigabit Ethernet
.It
IC Plus IP1000A Gigabit Ethernet
.It
Sundance ST-2021 Gigabit Ethernet
.It
Sundance ST-2023 Gigabit Ethernet
.It
Sundance TC9021 Gigabit Ethernet
.It
Tamarack TC9021 Gigabit Ethernet
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.stge.%d.rxint_nframe
Number of frames between RxDMAComplete interrupts.
The accepted range is 1 to 255, default value is 8 frames.
The interface has to be brought down and up again before a change takes effect.
.It Va dev.stge.%d.rxint_dmawait
Maximum amount of time to wait in 1us increments before issuing
an Rx interrupt if the number of frames received is less than
.Va rxint_nframe .
The accepted range is 0 to 4194, default value is 30 microseconds.
The interface has to be brought down and up again before a change takes effect.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was ported from
.Nx
and first appeared in
.Fx 6.2 .
The
.Nx
version was written by
.An Jason R. Thorpe Aq Mt thorpej@NetBSD.org .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was ported by
.An Pyun YongHyeon Aq Mt yongari@FreeBSD.org .
