.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract (FA8750-10-C-0237)
.\" ("CTSRD"), as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2012
.Dt TERASIC_MTL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm terasic_mtl
.Nd driver for the Terasic/Cambridge Multi-Touch LCD device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device terasic_mtl"
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.terasic_mtl.0.at="nexus0"
.Cd hint.terasic_mtl.0.reg_maddr=0x70400000
.Cd hint.terasic_mtl.0.reg_msize=0x1000
.Cd hint.terasic_mtl.0.pixel_maddr=0x70000000
.Cd hint.terasic_mtl.0.pixel_msize=0x177000
.Cd hint.terasic_mtl.0.text_maddr=0x70177000
.Cd hint.terasic_mtl.0.text_msize=0x2000
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for the Terasic Multi-Touch LCD combined as
controlled by a University of Cambridge's IP Core.
Three device nodes are instantiated, representing various services supported
by the device:
.Bl -tag -width terasic_pixelX
.It terasic_regX
Memory-mapped register interface, including touch screen input.
.It terasic_pixelX
Memory-mapped pixel-oriented frame buffer.
.It terasic_textX
Memory-mapped text-oriented frame buffer.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
devices are also attached to the
.Xr syscons 4
framework, which implements a VT-compatible terminal connected to the
.Xr tty 4
framework.
.Li ttyvX
device nodes may be added to
.Xr ttys 5
in order to launch
.Xr login 1
sessions at boot.
.Pp
Register, text, and pixel devices may be accessed using
.Xr read 2
and
.Xr write 2
system calls, and also memory mapped using
.Xr mmap 2 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr login 1 ,
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr mmap 2 ,
.Xr poll 2 ,
.Xr read 2 ,
.Xr write 2 ,
.Xr syscons 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ttys 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver and this manual page were
developed by SRI International and the University of Cambridge Computer
Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract
.Pq FA8750-10-C-0237
.Pq Do CTSRD Dc ,
as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
This device driver was written by
.An Robert N. M. Watson .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Xr syscons 4
attachment does not support the hardware cursor feature.
.Pp
A more structured interface to control registers using the
.Xr ioctl 2
system call, would sometimes be preferable to memory mapping.
For touch screen input, it would be highly desirable to offer a streaming
interface whose events can be managed using
.Xr poll 2
and related system calls, with the kernel performing polling rather than the
userspace application.
.Pp
.Nm
supports only a
.Li nexus
bus attachment, which is appropriate for system-on-chip busses such as
Altera's Avalon bus.
If the IP core is configured off of another bus type, then additional bus
attachments will be required.
