.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 14, 2011
.Dt TI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ti
.Nd "Alteon Networks Tigon I and Tigon II Gigabit Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ti"
.Cd "options TI_SF_BUF_JUMBO"
.Cd "options TI_JUMBO_HDRSPLIT"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ti_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on
the Alteon Networks Tigon Gigabit Ethernet controller chip.
The Tigon
contains an embedded R4000 CPU, gigabit MAC, dual DMA channels and
a PCI interface unit.
The Tigon II contains two R4000 CPUs and other
refinements.
Either chip can be used in either a 32-bit or 64-bit PCI
slot.
Communication with the chip is achieved via PCI shared memory
and bus master DMA.
The Tigon I and II support hardware multicast
address filtering, VLAN tag extraction and insertion, and jumbo
Ethernet frames sizes up to 9000 bytes.
Note that the Tigon I chipset
is no longer in active production: all new adapters should come equipped
with Tigon II chipsets.
.Pp
While the Tigon chipset supports 10, 100 and 1000Mbps speeds, support for
10 and 100Mbps speeds is only available on boards with the proper
transceivers.
Most adapters are only designed to work at 1000Mbps,
however the driver should support those NICs that work at lower speeds
as well.
.Pp
Support for jumbo frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit jumbo frames.
Using jumbo frames can greatly improve performance for certain tasks,
such as file transfers and data streaming.
.Pp
Header splitting support for Tigon 2 boards (this option has no effect for
the Tigon 1) can be turned on with the
.Dv TI_JUMBO_HDRSPLIT
option.
See
.Xr zero_copy 9
for more discussion on zero copy receive and header splitting.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver uses UMA backed jumbo receive buffers, but can be configured
to use
.Xr sendfile 2
buffer allocator.
To turn on
.Xr sendfile 2
buffer allocator, use the
.Dv TI_SF_BUF_JUMBO
option.
.Pp
Support for vlans is also available using the
.Xr vlan 4
mechanism.
See the
.Xr vlan 4
man page for more details.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 1000baseSX
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
Only
.Ar full-duplex
mode is supported at this speed.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full-duplex operation.
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the
Alteon Tigon I and II chips.
The
.Nm
driver has been tested with the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3Com 3c985-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 1)
.It
3Com 3c985B-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 2)
.It
Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)
.It
Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)
.It
Digital EtherWORKS 1000SX PCI Gigabit adapter
.It
Netgear GA620 Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)
.It
Netgear GA620T Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)
.El
.Pp
The following adapters should also be supported but have
not yet been tested:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Asante GigaNIX1000T Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.It
Asante PCI 1000BASE-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.It
Farallon PN9000SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.It
NEC Gigabit Ethernet
.It
Silicon Graphics PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va hw.ti.%d.dac
If this tunable is set to 0 it will disable DAC (Dual Address Cycle).
The default value is 1 which means driver will use full 64bit
DMA addressing.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables.
The interface has to be brought down and up again before a
change takes effect when any of the following tunables are
changed.
The one microsecond clock tick referenced below is a nominal
time and the actual hardware may not provide granularity to
this level.
For example, on Tigon 2 (revision 6) cards with release 12.0
the clock granularity is 5 microseconds.
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va dev.ti.%d.rx_coal_ticks
This value, receive coalesced ticks, controls the number of clock
ticks (of 1 microseconds each) that must elapse before the NIC DMAs
the receive return producer pointer to the Host and generates an
interrupt.
This parameter works in conjunction with the rx_max_coal_bds,
receive max coalesced BDs, tunable parameter.
The NIC will return the receive return producer pointer to the Host
when either of the thresholds is exceeded.
A value of 0 means that this parameter is ignored and receive BDs
will only be returned when the receive max coalesced BDs value is
reached.
The default value is 170.
.It Va dev.ti.%d.rx_max_coal_bds
This value, receive max coalesced BDs, controls the number of
receive buffer descriptors that will be coalesced before the NIC
updates the receive return ring producer index.
If this value is set to 0 it will disable receive buffer descriptor
coalescing.
The default value is 64.
.It Va dev.ti.%d.ti_tx_coal_ticks
This value, send coalesced ticks, controls the number of clock
ticks (of 1 microseconds each) that must elapse before the NIC DMAs
the send consumer pointer to the Host and generates an interrupt.
This parameter works in conjunction with the tx_max_coal_bds,
send max coalesced BDs, tunable parameter.
The NIC will return the send consumer pointer to the Host when
either of the thresholds is exceeded.
A value of 0 means that this parameter is ignored and send BDs will
only be returned when the send max coalesced BDs value is reached.
The default value is 2000.
.It Va dev.ti.%d.tx_max_coal_bds
This value, send max coalesced BDs, controls the number of send
buffer descriptors that will be coalesced before the NIC updates
the send consumer index.
If this value is set to 0 it will disable send buffer descriptor
coalescing.
The default value is 32.
.It Va dev.ti.%d.tx_buf_ratio
This value controls the ratio of the remaining memory in the NIC
that should be devoted to transmit buffer vs. receive buffer.
The lower 7 bits are used to indicate the ratio in 1/64th increments.
For example, setting this value to 16 will set the transmit buffer
to 1/4 of the remaining buffer space.
In no cases will the transmit or receive buffer be reduced below
68 KB.
For a 1 MB NIC the approximate total space for data buffers is
800 KB.
For a 512 KB NIC that number is 300 KB.
The default value is 21.
.It Va dev.ti.%d.stat_ticks
The value, stat ticks, controls the number of clock ticks
(of 1 microseconds each) that must elapse before the NIC DMAs
the statistics block to the Host and generates a STATS_UPDATED
event.
If set to zero then statistics are never DMAed to the Host.
It is recommended that this value be set to a high enough
frequency to not mislead someone reading statistics refreshes.
Several times a second is enough.
The default value is 2000000 (2 seconds).
.El
.Sh IOCTLS
In addition to the standard
.Xr socket 2
.Xr ioctl 2
calls implemented by most network drivers, the
.Nm
driver also includes a character device interface that can be used for
additional diagnostics, configuration and debugging.
With this character
device interface, and a specially patched version of
.Xr gdb 1 ,
the user can
debug firmware running on the Tigon board.
.Pp
These ioctls and their arguments are defined in the
.In sys/tiio.h
header file.
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv ALT_WRITE_TG_MEM"
.It Dv TIIOCGETSTATS
Return card statistics DMAed from the card into kernel memory approximately
every 2 seconds.
(That time interval can be changed via the
.Dv TIIOCSETPARAMS
ioctl.)
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_stats" .
.It Dv TIIOCGETPARAMS
Get various performance-related firmware parameters that largely affect how
interrupts are coalesced.
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_params" .
.It Dv TIIOCSETPARAMS
Set various performance-related firmware parameters that largely affect how
interrupts are coalesced.
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_params" .
.It Dv TIIOCSETTRACE
Tell the NIC to trace the requested types of information.
The argument is
.Vt ti_trace_type .
.It Dv TIIOCGETTRACE
Dump the trace buffer from the card.
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_trace_buf" .
.It Dv ALT_ATTACH
This ioctl is used for compatibility with Alteon's Solaris driver.
They apparently only have one character interface for debugging, so they have
to tell it which Tigon instance they want to debug.
This ioctl is a noop for
.Fx .
.It Dv ALT_READ_TG_MEM
Read the requested memory region from the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_mem" .
.It Dv ALT_WRITE_TG_MEM
Write to the requested memory region on the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_mem" .
.It Dv ALT_READ_TG_REG
Read the requested register from the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_reg" .
.It Dv ALT_WRITE_TG_REG
Write to the requested register on the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_reg" .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/ti[0-255]" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ti[0-255]
Tigon driver character interface.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ti%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "ti%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "ti%d: no memory for softc struct!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for per-device instance information
during initialization.
.It "ti%d: failed to enable memory mapping!"
The driver failed to initialize PCI shared memory mapping.
This might
happen if the card is not in a bus-master slot.
.It "ti%d: no memory for jumbo buffers!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for jumbo frames during
initialization.
.It "ti%d: bios thinks we're in a 64 bit slot, but we aren't"
The BIOS has programmed the NIC as though it had been installed in
a 64-bit PCI slot, but in fact the NIC is in a 32-bit slot.
This happens
as a result of a bug in some BIOSes.
This can be worked around on the
Tigon II, but on the Tigon I initialization will fail.
.It "ti%d: board self-diagnostics failed!"
The ROMFAIL bit in the CPU state register was set after system
startup, indicating that the on-board NIC diagnostics failed.
.It "ti%d: unknown hwrev"
The driver detected a board with an unsupported hardware revision.
The
.Nm
driver supports revision 4 (Tigon 1) and revision 6 (Tigon 2) chips
and has firmware only for those devices.
.It "ti%d: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sendfile 2 ,
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr zero_copy 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@bsdi.com .
The header splitting firmware modifications, character
.Xr ioctl 2
interface and debugging support were written by
.An Kenneth Merry Aq Mt ken@FreeBSD.org .
Initial zero copy support was written by
.An Andrew Gallatin Aq Mt gallatin@FreeBSD.org .
