.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2018
.Dt TL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tl
.Nd "Texas Instruments ThunderLAN Ethernet device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device tl"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_tl_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Ethernet adapters based on the Texas
Instruments ThunderLAN Ethernet controller chip.
.Pp
The ThunderLAN controller has a standard MII interface that supports
up to 32 physical interface devices (PHYs).
It also has a built-in
10baseT PHY hardwired at MII address 31, which may be used in some
10Mbps-only hardware configurations.
In 100Mbps configurations, a
National Semiconductor DP83840A or other MII-compliant PHY may be
attached to the ThunderLAN's MII bus.
If a DP83840A or equivalent
is available, the ThunderLAN chip can operate at either 100Mbps or
10Mbps in either half-duplex or full-duplex modes.
The ThunderLAN's
built-in PHY and the DP83840A also support autonegotiation.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
Note that this
option is only available on those PHYs that support autonegotiation.
Also, the PHY will not advertise those modes that have been explicitly
disabled using the following media options.
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.It 10base5/AUI
Enable AUI/BNC interface (useful only with the built-in PHY).
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.It hw-loopback
Enable hardware loopback mode.
.El
.Pp
Note that the 100baseTX media type is only available if supported
by the PHY.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Texas Instruments ThunderLAN based
Ethernet and Fast Ethernet adapters including a large
number of Compaq PCI Ethernet adapters.
Also supported are:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Olicom OC-2135/2138 10/100 TX UTP adapter
.It
Olicom OC-2325/OC-2326 10/100 TX UTP adapter
.It
Racore 8148 10baseT/100baseTX/100baseFX adapter
.It
Racore 8165 10/100baseTX adapter
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver also supports the built-in Ethernet adapters of
various Compaq Prosignia servers and Compaq Deskpro desktop
machines including:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10 T PCI UTP/Coax
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10/100
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Dual-Port
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Proliant
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX Embedded UTP
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX UTP
.It
Compaq NetFlex 3P
.It
Compaq NetFlex 3P Integrated
.It
Compaq NetFlex 3P w/BNC
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "tl%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "tl%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "tl%d: device timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.It "tl%d: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.It "tl%d: no memory for tx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the transmitter ring when
allocating a pad buffer or collapsing an mbuf chain into a cluster.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu .
