.\"	$NetBSD: trm.4,v 1.3 2001/11/11 05:24:45 tsutsui Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, David E O'Brien.  All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, Izumi Tsutsui.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 8, 2002
.Dt TRM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm trm
.Nd Tekram TRM-S1040 ASIC based PCI SCSI host adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device trm"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
trm_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports PCI SCSI host adapters based on the Tekram TRM-S1040 SCSI ASIC.
.Sh HARDWARE
SCSI controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Tn Tekram DC-315
PCI Ultra SCSI adapter without BIOS and internal SCSI connector
.It
.Tn Tekram DC-315U
PCI Ultra SCSI adapter without BIOS
.It
.Tn Tekram DC-395F
PCI Ultra-Wide SCSI adapter with flash BIOS and 68-pin external SCSI connector
.It
.Tn Tekram DC-395U
PCI Ultra SCSI adapter with flash BIOS
.It
.Tn Tekram DC-395UW
PCI Ultra-Wide SCSI adapter with flash BIOS
.It
.Tn Tekram DC-395U2W
PCI Ultra2-Wide SCSI adapter with flash BIOS
.El
.Pp
For the Tekram DC-310/U and DC-390F/U/UW/U2B/U2W/U3W PCI SCSI host adapters,
use the
.Xr sym 4
driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sym 4
.Pp
.Pa http://www.tekram.com/
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written for
.Fx 3.0 Ns /i386
by
.An Erich Chen
of Tekram Technology,
and ported to
.Fx 5.0
by
.An Olivier Houchard Aq Mt cognet@FreeBSD.org .
