.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 3ware, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 BSDi
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 9, 2007
.Dt TWA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm twa
.Nd 3ware 9000/9500/9550/9650 series SATA RAID controllers driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device twa"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
twa_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for AMCC's 3ware 9000/9500/9550/9650 series
SATA controllers.
.Pp
These controllers are available in 4, 8, 12 or 16-port configurations,
and support the following RAID levels: 0, 1, 10, 5, 50.
The device nodes for the controllers are of the form
.Pa /dev/twa Ns Ar X ,
where
.Ar X
is the controller number.
The driver is implemented as a SCSI SIM
under CAM, and, as such, the logical units that it controls are accessible
via the device nodes,
.Pa /dev/da Ns Ar Y ,
where
.Ar Y
is the logical unit number.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following SATA RAID controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500S-4LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500S-8
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500S-8MI
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500S-12
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500S-12MI
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500SX-4LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500SX-8LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500SX-12
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500SX-12MI
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9500SX-16ML
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9550SX-4LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9550SX-8LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9550SX-12
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9550SX-12MI
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9550SX-16ML
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9650SE-2LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9650SE-4LPML
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9650SE-8LPML
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9650SE-12ML
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9650SE-16ML
.It
AMCC's 3ware 9650SE-24M8
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Whenever the driver encounters a command failure, it prints out an error code in
the format:
.Qq Li "ERROR: (<error source>: <error code>):" ,
followed by a text description of the error.
There are other error messages and warnings that the
driver prints out, depending on the kinds of errors that it encounters.
If the driver is compiled with
.Dv TWA_DEBUG
defined, it prints out a whole bunch of debug
messages, the quantity of which varies depending on the value assigned to
.Dv TWA_DEBUG
(0 to 10).
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and manpage were written by
.An Vinod Kashyap Aq Mt vkashyap@FreeBSD.org .
