.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Michael Smith
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 BSDi
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 15, 2004
.Dt TWE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm twe
.Nd 3ware 5000/6000/7000/8000 series PATA/SATA RAID adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device twe"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
twe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for AMCC's 3ware 5000/6000/7000/8000 series
PATA/SATA RAID adapters.
These adapters were formerly known as
.Dq 3ware Escalade .
.Pp
These devices support 2, 4, 8, or 12 ATA disk drives
and provide RAID0 (striping) and RAID1 (mirroring) functionality.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following PATA/SATA RAID
controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
AMCC's 3ware 5000 series
.It
AMCC's 3ware 6000 series
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7000-2
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7006-2
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7500-4LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7500-8
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7500-12
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7506-4LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7506-8
.It
AMCC's 3ware 7506-12
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8006-2LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8500-4LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8500-8
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8500-12
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8506-4LP
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8506-8
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8506-8MI
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8506-12
.It
AMCC's 3ware 8506-12MI
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Ss Controller initialisation phase
.Bl -diag
.It twe%d: microcontroller not ready
.Pp
The controller's onboard CPU is not reporting that it is ready;
this may be due to either a board or system failure.
Initialisation has failed.
.It twe%d: no attention interrupt
.It twe%d: can't drain AEN queue
.It twe%d: reset not reported
.It twe%d: controller errors detected
.It twe%d: can't drain response queue
.It twe%d: reset %d failed, trying again
.Pp
The controller is not responding correctly to
the driver's attempts to reset and initialise it.
This process is retried several times.
.It twe%d: can't initialise controller, giving up
.Pp
Several attempts to reset and initialise the controller have failed;
initialisation has failed
and the driver will not attach to this controller.
.El
.Ss Driver initialisation/shutdown phase
.Bl -diag
.It twe%d: register window not available
.It twe%d: can't allocate register window
.It twe%d: can't allocate parent DMA tag
.It twe%d: can't allocate interrupt
.It twe%d: can't set up interrupt
.It twe%d: can't establish configuration hook
.Pp
A resource allocation error occurred while initialising the driver;
initialisation has failed
and the driver will not attach to this controller.
.It twe%d: can't detect attached units
.Pp
Fetching the list of attached units failed; initialisation has failed.
.It twe%d: error fetching capacity for unit %d
.It twe%d: error fetching state for unit %d
.It twe%d: error fetching descriptor size for unit %d
.It twe%d: error fetching descriptor for unit %d
.It twe%d: device_add_child failed
.It twe%d: bus_generic_attach returned %d
.Pp
Creation of the disk devices failed, either due to communication
problems with the adapter or due to resource shortage;
attachment of one or more units may have been aborted.
.El
.Ss Operational phase
.Bl -diag
.It twe%d: command completed - %s
.El
.Pp
A command was reported completed with a warning by the controller.
The warning may be one of:
.Bl -diag
.It redundant/inconsequential request ignored
.It failed to write zeroes to LBA 0
.It failed to profile TwinStor zones
.El
.Bl -diag
.It twe%d: command failed - %s
.El
.Pp
A command was reported as failed by the controller.
The failure message may be one of:
.Bl -diag
.It aborted due to system command or reconfiguration
.It aborted
.It access error
.It access violation
.It device failure
.It controller error
.It timed out
.It invalid unit number
.It unit not available
.It undefined opcode
.It request incompatible with unit
.It invalid request
.It firmware error, reset requested
.Pp
The command will be returned to the operating system after a
fatal error.
.El
.Bl -diag
.It twe%d: command failed submission - controller wedged
.Pp
A command could not be delivered to the controller because
the controller is unresponsive.
.It twe%d: AEN: <%s>
.El
.Pp
The controller has reported a change in status using an AEN
(Asynchronous Event Notification).
The following AENs may be reported:
.Bl -diag
.It queue empty
.It soft reset
.It degraded mirror
.It controller error
.It rebuild fail
.It rebuild done
.It incomplete unit
.It initialisation done
.It unclean shutdown detected
.It drive timeout
.It drive error
.It rebuild started
.It aen queue full
.Pp
AENs are also queued internally for use by management tools.
.El
.Bl -diag
.It twe%d: error polling for signalled AENs
.Pp
The controller has reported
that one or more status messages are ready for the driver,
but attempting to fetch one of these has returned an error.
.It twe%d: AEN queue overflow, lost AEN <%s>
.Pp
A status message was retrieved from the controller,
but there is no more room to queue it in the driver.
The message is lost (but will be printed to the console).
.It twe%d: missing expected status bits %s
.It twe%d: unexpected status bits %s
.Pp
A check of the controller's status bits
indicates an unexpected condition.
.It twe%d: host interrupt
.Pp
The controller has signalled a host interrupt.
This serves an unknown purpose and is ignored.
.It twe%d: command interrupt
.Pp
The controller has signalled a command interrupt.
This is not used, and will be disabled.
.It twe%d: controller reset in progress...
.Pp
The controller is being reset by the driver.
Typically this is done when the driver has determined that the
controller is in an unrecoverable state.
.It twe%d: can't reset controller, giving up
.Pp
The driver has given up on resetting the controller.
No further I/O will be handled.
.It controller reset done, %d commands restarted
.Pp
The controller was successfully reset,
and outstanding commands were restarted.
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver and manual page were written by
.An Michael Smith Aq Mt msmith@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
Extensive work done on the driver by
.An Vinod Kashyap Aq Mt vkashyap@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Paul Saab Aq Mt ps@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The controller cannot handle I/O transfers
that are not aligned to a 512-byte boundary.
In order to support raw device access from user-space,
the driver will perform alignment fixup on non-aligned data.
This process is inefficient,
and thus in order to obtain best performance
user-space applications accessing the device
should do so with aligned buffers.
