.\"
.\"Copyright (c) 2010, 2011 iXsystems, Inc.
.\"All rights reserved.
.\" written by: Xin LI <delphij@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\"are met:
.\"1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\"ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\"ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\"OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\"HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\"LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\"OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\"SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 4, 2011
.Dt TWS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tws
.Nd 3ware 9750 SATA+SAS 6Gb/s RAID controller card driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device tws"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tws_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for LSI's 3ware 9750 SATA+SAS 6Gb/s RAID controller cards.
.Pp
These controllers feature the LSISAS2108 6Gb/s SAS RAID-on-Chip (ROC)
and are available in 4- and 8-port configurations, supports RAID levels
0, 1, 5, 6, 10, 50 and single disk, with 96 SATA and/or SAS hard drives and SSDs.
.Pp
For further hardware information, see
.Pa http://www.lsi.com/.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following SATA/SAS RAID controller:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
LSI's 3ware SAS 9750 series
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width "hw.tws.use_32bit_sgls"
.It Va hw.tws.cam_depth
The maximum queued CAM SIM requests for one controller.
The default value is 256.
.It Va hw.tws.enable_msi
This tunable enables MSI support on the controller if set to a non-zero value.
The default value is 0.
.It Va hw.tws.queue_depth
The maximum queued requests for one controller.
.It Va hw.tws.use_32bit_sgls
Limit the driver to use only 32-bit SG elements regardless whether the operating
system is running in 64-bit mode.
The default value is 0.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/tws?" -compact
.It Pa /dev/da?
array/logical disk interface
.It Pa /dev/tws?
management interface
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Whenever the driver encounters a command failure, it prints out an error code in
the format:
.Qq Li "ERROR: (<error source>: <error code>):" ,
followed by a text description of the error.
There are other error messages and warnings that the
driver prints out, depending on the kinds of errors that it encounters.
If the driver is compiled with
.Dv TWS_DEBUG
defined, it prints out a whole bunch of debug
messages.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Manjunath Ranganathaiah
for LSI and this manual page was written by
.An Xin LI Aq Mt delphij@FreeBSD.org
for iXsystems, Inc.
