.\"     $OpenBSD: txp.4,v 1.8 2001/06/26 02:09:11 pjanzen Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Jason L. Wright (jason@thought.net)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2018
.Dt TXP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm txp
.Nd "3Com 3XP Typhoon/Sidewinder (3CR990) Ethernet interface"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device txp"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_txp_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface provides access to the 10Mb/s and 100Mb/s Ethernet networks via the
.Tn 3Com
.Tn Typhoon/Sidewinder
chipset.
.Pp
Basic Ethernet functions are provided as well as support for
.Xr vlan 4
tag removal and insertion assistance, receive
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
and
.Xr udp 4
checksum offloading,
and
transmit
.Xr ip 4
checksum offloading.
There is currently no support for
transmit
.Xr tcp 4
or
.Xr udp 4
checksum offloading,
.Xr tcp 4
segmentation, nor
.Xr ipsec 4
acceleration.
.Pp
When a
.Nm
interface is brought up, by default, it will attempt to auto-negotiate the
link speed and duplex mode.
The speeds, in order of attempt, are:
100Mb/s Full Duplex, 100Mb/s Half Duplex, 10 Mb/s Full Duplex, and
10 Mb/s Half Duplex.
.Pp
The
.Nm
supports several media types, which are selected via the
.Xr ifconfig 8
command.
The supported media types are:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm media autoselect
Attempt to autoselect the media type (default)
.It Cm media 100baseTX mediaopt full-duplex
Use 100baseTX, full duplex
.It Cm media 100baseTX Op Cm mediaopt half-duplex
Use 100baseTX, half duplex
.It Cm media 10baseT mediaopt full-duplex
Use 10baseT, full duplex
.It Cm media 10baseT Op Cm mediaopt half-duplex
Use 10baseT, half duplex
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
3Com 3CR990-TX-95
.It
3Com 3CR990-TX-97
.It
3Com 3cR990B-TXM
.It
3Com 3CR990SVR95
.It
3Com 3CR990SVR97
.It
3Com 3cR990B-SRV
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr udp 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 2.9 .
