.\"	$OpenBSD: udav.4,v 1.17 2015/07/15 18:02:15 sobrado Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: udav.4,v 1.1 2003/08/22 06:42:01 itojun Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003
.\"     Shingo WATANABE <nabe@nabechan.org>. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2014
.\"     Takayoshi SASANO <uaa@uaa.org.uk>. (RD9700 support)
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 15 2015 $
.Dt UDAV 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm udav
.Nd Davicom DM9601 10/100 USB Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "udav*  at uhub?"
.Cd "amphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB
.Tn Ethernet
adapters based on the Davicom DM9601 USB-ether bridge chip.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Dv -offset indent -compact
.It Tn Corega FEther USB-TXC
.It Tn HenTong WK-668
.It Tn Konig CMP-NWUSB10
.It Tn ShanTou ST268
.It Tn ShanTou ZT6688
.It Tn ShanTou ADM8515
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver also supports CoreChip RD9700.
As many of these units ship with the same MAC address, it is
highly recommended to use
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm lladdr
to set the address manually, or
.Cm lladdr random
to assign a random address.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr amphy 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr mii 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr uhub 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T Davicom DM9601 data sheet
.%U http://www.davicom.com.tw/big5/download/Data%20Sheet/DM9601-DS-P01-930914.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Shingo WATANABE Aq Mt nabe@nabechan.org
and ported to
.Ox
by
.An Jonathan Gray Aq Mt jsg@openbsd.org .
.Pp
RD9700 support by
.An Takayoshi SASANO Aq Mt uaa@uaa.org.uk .
.Sh BUGS
The RD9700 sometimes lacks zero-length packets to terminate
USB transactions, which can cause USB IOERRORs.
