.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Gleb Smirnoff <glebius@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 5, 2018
.Dt UEP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uep
.Nd eGalax touchscreen driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device uep"
.Cd "device usb"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uep_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
To compile this driver with evdev support enabled, place the
following lines into the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options EVDEV_SUPPORT"
.Cd "device evdev"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the eGalax onscreen touch panels.
.Pp
The driver is a stub.
It just probes and attaches to USB device, creates a device entry
and feeds reassembled packets from the hardware to it.
Depending on compile-time kernel options it supports either native
or evdev operation modes.
.Pp
To get the mouse working in
.Xr X 7
in native mode, install
.Pa ports/x11-drivers/xf86-input-egalax .
.Pp
To get the mouse working in
.Xr X 7
in evdev mode, install
.Pa ports/x11-drivers/xf86-input-evdev .
.Sh FILES
.Nm
creates a blocking pseudo-device file,
.Pa /dev/uep0
in native mode or
.Pa /dev/input/eventN
in evdev mode.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr xorg.conf 5 Pq Pa ports/x11/xorg ,
.Xr egalax 4 Pq Pa ports/x11-drivers/xf86-input-egalax ,
.Xr evdev 4 Pq Pa ports/x11-drivers/xf86-input-evdev .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Gleb Smirnoff Aq Mt glebius@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
cannot act like
.Xr sysmouse 4 ,
as
.Xr sysmouse 4
does not support absolute motion events.
