.\" $NetBSD: uftdi.4,v 1.5 2002/02/07 03:15:08 ross Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 26, 2017
.Dt UFTDI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uftdi
.Nd USB support for serial adapters based on the FTDI family of USB
serial adapter chips.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device ucom"
.Cd "device uftdi"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uftdi_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various serial adapters based on the
following FTDI chips:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
FT8U100AX
.It
FT8U232AM
.It
FT8U232BM
.It
FT232R
.It
FT2232C
.It
FT2232D
.It
FT2232H
.It
FT4232H
.It
FT230X
.El
.Pp
The device is accessed through the
.Xr ucom 4
driver which makes it behave like a
.Xr tty 4 .
.Pp
Many of the supported chips provide additional functionality
such as bitbang mode and the MPSSE engine for serial bus emulation.
The
.Nm
driver provides access to that functionality with the following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls, defined in
.In dev/usb/uftdiio.h :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_RESET_IO Pq Vt int
Reset the channel to its default configuration, flush RX and TX FIFOs.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_RESET_RX Pq Vt int
Flush the RX FIFO.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_RESET_TX Pq Vt int
Flush the TX FIFO.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_SET_BITMODE Pq Vt "struct uftdi_bitmode"
Put the channel into the operating mode specified in
.Va mode ,
and set the pins indicated by ones in
.Va iomask
to output mode.
The
.Va mode
must be one of the
.Va uftdi_bitmodes
values.
Setting
.Va mode
to
.Dv UFTDI_BITMODE_NONE
returns the channel to standard UART mode.
.Bd -literal
enum uftdi_bitmodes
{
	UFTDI_BITMODE_ASYNC = 0,
	UFTDI_BITMODE_MPSSE = 1,
	UFTDI_BITMODE_SYNC = 2,
	UFTDI_BITMODE_CPU_EMUL = 3,
	UFTDI_BITMODE_FAST_SERIAL = 4,
	UFTDI_BITMODE_CBUS = 5,
	UFTDI_BITMODE_NONE = 0xff,
};

struct uftdi_bitmode
{
	uint8_t mode;
	uint8_t iomask;
};
.Ed
.Pp
Manuals and application notes published by FTDI describe these
modes in detail.
To use most of these modes, you first put the channel into
the desired mode, then you
.Xr read 2
and
.Xr write 2
data which either reflects pin state or is interpreted
as MPSSE commands and parameters, depending on the mode.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_GET_BITMODE Pq Vt "struct uftdi_bitmode"
Return the current bitbang mode in the
.Va mode
member, and the state of the DBUS0..DBUS7 pins at the time
of the call in the
.Va iomask
member.
The pin state can be read while the chip is in any mode, including
.Dv UFTDI_BITMODE_NONE
(UART) mode.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_SET_ERROR_CHAR Pq Vt int
Set the character which is inserted into the buffer to mark
the point of an error such as FIFO overflow.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_SET_EVENT_CHAR Pq Vt int
Set the character which causes a partial FIFO full of data
to be returned immediately even if the FIFO is not full.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_SET_LATENCY Pq Vt int
Set the amount of time to wait for a full FIFO,
in milliseconds.
If more than this much time elapses without receiving a new
character, any characters in the FIFO are returned.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_GET_LATENCY Pq Vt int
Get the current value of the latency timer.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_GET_HWREV Pq Vt int
Get the hardware revision number.
This is the
.Va bcdDevice
value from the
.Va usb_device_descriptor .
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_READ_EEPROM Pq Vt "struct uftdi_eeio"
Read one or more words from the configuration eeprom.
The FTDI chip performs eeprom I/O in 16-bit words.
Set
.Va offset
and
.Va length
to values evenly divisible by two before the call, and the
.Va data
array will contain the requested values from eeprom after the call.
.Bd -literal
struct uftdi_eeio
{
	uint16_t offset;
	uint16_t length;
	uint16_t data[64];
};
.Ed
.Pp
The FT232R chip has an internal eeprom.
An external serial eeprom is optional on other FTDI chips.
The eeprom may contain 64, 128, or 256 words,
depending on the part used.
Multiple calls may be needed to read or write the larger parts.
When no eeprom is present, all words in the returned data are 0xffff.
An erased eeprom also reads as all 0xffff.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_WRITE_EEPROM Pq Vt "struct uftdi_eeio"
Write one or more words to the configuration eeprom.
The
.Va uftdi_eeio
values are as described for
.Dv UFTDIIOC_READ_EEPROM .
.Pp
The FTDI chip does a blind write to the eeprom, and it will appear
to succeed even when no eeprom is present.
To ensure a good write you must read back and verify the data.
It is
.Em not
necessary to erase before writing.
Any position within the eeprom can be overwritten at any time.
.It Dv UFTDIIOC_ERASE_EEPROM Pq Vt int
Erase the entire eeprom.
This is useful primarily for test and debugging, as there is no
need to erase before writing.
To help prevent accidental erasure caused by calling the wrong
ioctl, you must pass the special value
.Dv UFTDI_CONFIRM_ERASE
as the argument to this ioctl.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
B&B Electronics USB->RS422/485 adapter
.It
Elexol USB MOD1 and USB MOD3
.It
HP USB-Serial adapter shipped with some HP laptops
.It
Inland UAS111
.It
QVS USC-1000
.It
Buffalo PC-OP-RS / Kurouto-shikou KURO-RS universal remote
.It
Prologix GPIB-USB Controller
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/ttyU*.init" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*
for callin ports
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*.init
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*.lock
corresponding callin initial-state and lock-state devices
.Pp
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*
for callout ports
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*.init
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*.lock
corresponding callout initial-state and lock-state devices
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ucom 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
appeared in
.Fx 4.8
from
.Nx 1.5 .
