.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Fredrik Lindberg
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 20, 2010
.Dt UHSO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uhso
.Nd support for several HSxPA devices from Option N.V.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
The module can be loaded at boot time by placing the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uhso_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for several HSxPA devices from Option N.V. that are
based on their packet interface.
Each device has a set of serial ports and a raw IP packet interface.
The serial ports of the device are accessed through the
.Xr ucom 4
driver which makes them behave like
.Xr tty 4
devices.
The packet interface is exposed as a network interface.
.Pp
Establishing a connection on the packet interface is achieved by using the
proprietary AT commands
.Dq Li AT_OWANCALL
and
.Dq Li AT_OWANDATA
on any of the available serial ports.
.Pp
The network interface must be configured manually using the data obtain from
these calls.
.Pp
Each device usually have at least two or more serial ports, their individual purpose
can be identified through
.Xr sysctl 8 .
Ports identified as
.Dq Modem
features a normal modem interface that can be used with PPP.
Ports identified as
.Dq Diagnostic
uses a proprietary binary interface used for firmware upgrades, this port does not
have a AT command interface and can not be used to control the device.
Other ports features an AT command interface that can be used for normal device control.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver should work with most devices from Option.
The following devices have been verified to work
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Option GlobeSurfer iCON 7.2 (new firmware)
.It
Option GlobeTrotter Max 7.2 (new firmware)
.It
Option iCON 225
.It
Option iCON 452
.It
Option iCON 505
.El
.Pp
The device features a mass storage device referred to as
.Dq Zero-CD
which contains drivers for Microsoft Windows; this is the default
mode for the device.
The
.Nm
driver automatically switches the device from
.Dq Zero-CD
mode to modem mode.
This behavior can be disabled by setting
.Va hw.usb.uhso.auto_switch
to 0 using
.Xr sysctl 8 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "XXXXXX"
.It Pa /dev/cuaU?.?
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Establishing a packet interface connection using the AT command interface available
at one of the serial ports
.Bd -literal -offset indent
AT+CGDCONT=1,,"apn.provider"
AT_OWANCALL=1,1,1
OK
_OWANCALL=1,1

AT_OWANDATA=1
_OWANDATA: 1, 10.11.12.13, 0.0.0.0, 10.2.3.4, 10.2.3.5, \e
	0.0.0.0, 0.0.0.0, 72000
.Ed
.Pp
Configuring the interface
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig uhso0 10.11.12.13 up
route add default -interface uhso0
echo "nameserver 10.2.3.4" > /etc/resolv.conf
echo "nameserver 10.2.3.5" >> /etc/resolv.conf
.Ed
.Pp
The connection can be terminated with
.Bd -literal -offset indent
AT_OWANCALL=1,0,1
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr uhsoctl 1 ,
.Xr ucom 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Fredrik Lindberg Aq Mt fli@shapeshifter.se .
