.\" $OpenBSD: ukbd.4,v 1.22 2019/05/11 14:19:16 abieber Exp $
.\" $NetBSD: ukbd.4,v 1.10 2001/12/29 15:12:32 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999, 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999
.\" 	Matthias Drochner.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 11 2019 $
.Dt UKBD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ukbd
.Nd USB keyboard support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ukbd*  at uhidev?"
.Cd "wskbd* at ukbd?"
.Cd "option UKBD_LAYOUT=XXX"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB keyboards i.e. HID devices in the
.Dq keyboard
class.
Access to the keyboard is through the
.Xr wskbd 4
driver.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports a number of different key mappings which
can be chosen from with the kernel option
.Dq UKBD_LAYOUT
at compile time or with the utility
.Xr wsconsctl 8
(variable:
.Dq keyboard.encoding )
at runtime.
Other mappings can be used if the whole keymap is replaced by means of
.Xr wsconsctl 8 .
The built-in mappings are at this time:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It KB_BE
.Pq be
Belgium French.
.It KB_BR
.Pq br
Brazilian.
.It KB_CF
.Pq cf
Canadian French.
.It KB_DE
.Pq de
German with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_DK
.Pq dk
Danish with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_ES
.Pq es
Spanish.
.It KB_FR
.Pq fr
French.
.It KB_FR | KB_APPLE
.Pq fr.apple
French for
.Tn Apple
black USB keyboards.
.It KB_FR | KB_DVORAK
.Pq fr.dvorak
French keyboard with
.Dq Dvorak-Bepo
layout.
.It KB_HU
.Pq hu
Hungarian.
.It KB_IS
.Pq is
Icelandic with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_IT
.Pq it
Italian.
.It KB_JP
.Pq jp
Japanese.
.It KB_LA
.Pq la
Latinamerican.
.It KB_LT
.Pq \&lt
Lithuanian in
.Dq ISO 8859-13 .
.It KB_LV
.Pq \&lv
Latvian
.It KB_NL
.Pq \&nl
Dutch with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_NO
.Pq no
Norwegian with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_PL
.Pq pl
Polish in
.Dq ISO 8859-2 .
.It KB_PT
.Pq pt
Portuguese.
.It KB_PT | KB_APPLE
.Pq pt.apple
Portuguese for
.Tn Apple
black USB keyboards.
.It KB_RU
.Pq ru
Russian in
.Dq KOI8 .
.It KB_SF
.Pq sf
Swiss French with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_SG
.Pq sg
Swiss German with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_SI
.Pq si
Slovenian.
.It KB_SV
.Pq sv
Swedish with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_TR
.Pq tr
Turkish in
.Dq ISO 8859-9
with
.Dq dead accents .
.It KB_UA
.Pq ua
Ukrainian in
.Dq KOI8 .
.It KB_UK
.Pq uk
British.
.It KB_US
.Pq us
English/US keyboard mapping (default).
.It KB_US | KB_COLEMAK
.Pq us.colemak
English/US keyboard with
.Dq Colemak
layout.
.It KB_US | KB_DVORAK
.Pq us.dvorak
English/US keyboard with
.Dq Dvorak
layout.
.El
.Pp
The KB_DE, KB_DK, KB_IS, KB_NO, KB_SF, KB_SG, KB_SV and KB_TR
mappings can be used in the KB_NODEAD
.Pq .nodead
variant.
This switches off the
.Dq dead accents .
.Pp
The KB_BE, KB_FR, KB_FR | KB_APPLE, KB_FR | KB_DVORAK, KB_JP, KB_UK, KB_US,
KB_US | KB_DVORAK and KB_US | KB_COLEMAK
mappings can be modified
to swap the left Control and the Caps Lock keys by the
KB_SWAPCTRLCAPS variant bit or the
.Dq .swapctrlcaps
suffix.
.Pp
The KB_METAESC
.Pq .metaesc
option can be applied to any layout.
If set, keys pressed together
with the ALT modifier are prefixed by an ESC character.
(Standard behaviour is to add 128 to the ASCII value.)
.Sh EXAMPLES
To set a German keyboard layout without
.Dq dead accents
and sending an ESC character before the key symbol if the ALT
key is pressed simultaneously, use
.Ic wsconsctl keyboard.encoding=de.nodead.metaesc .
To set it at kernel build time, add the following
to the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
option UKBD_LAYOUT="(KB_DE|KB_NODEAD|KB_METAESC)"
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr usbhidctl 1 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr uhidev 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr wskbd 4 ,
.Xr wsconsctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
appeared in
.Nx 1.4 .
.Ox
support was added in
.Ox 2.8 .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver is brought into action rather late in the boot process, so if
it is used as the console driver then
.Xr ddb 4
is not usable until late in the boot.
.Pp
The list of built-in mappings doesn't follow any logic.
It grew as people submitted what they needed.
