.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Kevin Lo
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 31, 2017
.Dt ULED 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uled
.Nd USB LED driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device uled"
.Cd "device usb"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time,
place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uled_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Dream Cheeky WebMail Notifier and
ThingM blink(1) notification LED.
.Pp
Subsequently, the
.Pa /dev/uled0
device can be used by userland applications.
.Sh IOCTLS
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
commands can be performed on
.Pa /dev/uled0 ,
which are defined in
.In dev/usb/uled_ioctl.h :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv ULED_GET_COLOR
The command returns LED colors with values for RGB.
This
.Xr ioctl 2
takes the following structure:
.Bd -literal
struct uled_color {
	uint8_t	red;
	uint8_t	green;
	uint8_t	blue;
};
.Ed
.It Dv ULED_SET_COLOR
The command sets LED colors with values for RGB.
It uses the same structure as above.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/uled0" -compact
.It Pa /dev/uled0
blocking device node
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ohci 4 ,
.Xr uhci 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Kevin Lo Aq Mt kevlo@FreeBSD.org .
