.\" $NetBSD: ulpt.4,v 1.6 2002/02/05 00:37:48 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 22, 2006
.Dt ULPT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ulpt
.Nd USB printer support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ulpt"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ulpt_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB printers that follow the printer
bi- or uni-directional protocol.
The bits in the minor number select various features of the driver.
.Bl -column "Minor Bit" "Functionxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx" -offset indent
.It Em "Minor Bit" Ta Em "Function"
.It "64" Ta "Do not initialize (reset) the device on the port."
.El
.Pp
Some printers cannot handle the reset on open; in case of problems try the
.Pa unlpt
device.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB printers and parallel printer
conversion cables, including the following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
ATen parallel printer adapter
.It
Belkin F5U002 parallel printer adapter
.It
Canon BJ F850, S600
.It
Canon LBP-1310, 350
.It
Entrega USB-to-parallel printer adapter
.It
Hewlett-Packard HP Deskjet 3420 (P/N: C8947A #ABJ)
.It
Oki Data MICROLINE ML660PS
.It
Seiko Epson PM-900C, 880C, 820C, 730C
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/unlpt?" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ulpt?
device with reset
.It Pa /dev/unlpt?
device without reset
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lpt 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
appeared in
.Nx 1.4 .
This manual page was adopted from
.Nx
by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org
in April 2002.
