.\" Copyright (c) 1999
.\"	Nick Hibma <n_hibma@FreeBSD.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 19, 2014
.Dt UMASS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm umass
.Nd USB Mass Storage Devices driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device umass"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
umass_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Mass Storage devices that attach to the USB
port.
.Pp
To use the
.Nm
driver,
.Xr usb 4
and one of
.Xr uhci 4
or
.Xr ohci 4
or
.Xr ehci 4
or
.Xr xhci 4
must be configured in the kernel.
Additionally, since
.Nm
uses the SCSI subsystem and sometimes acts as a SCSI device, it
requires
.Xr da 4
and
.Xr scbus 4
to be included in the kernel.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports USB Mass Storage devices, including:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
ADTEC Stick Drive AD-UST32M, 64M, 128M, 256M
.It
Denno FireWire/USB2 Removable 2.5-inch HDD Case MIFU-25CB20
.It
FujiFilm Zip USB Drive ZDR100 USB A
.It
GREEN HOUSE USB Flash Memory "PicoDrive" GH-UFD32M, 64M, 128M
.It
Huawei Mobile (SD slot)
.It
IBM 32MB USB Memory Key (P/N 22P5296)
.It
IBM 256MB USB Drive (MSYSTEM DiskOnKey2)
.It
IBM ThinkPad USB Portable CD-ROM Drive (P/N 33L5151)
.It
I-O DATA USB CD/CD-R/CD-RW/DVD-R/DVD-RW/DVD-RAM/DVD-ROM Drive DVR-iUH2 (CDROM, DVD-RAM only)
.It
I-O DATA USB x6 CD-RW Drive CDRW-i64/USB (CDROM only)
.It
I-O DATA USB/IEEE1394 Portable HD Drive HDP-i30P/CI, HDP-i40P/CI
.It
Iomega USB Zip 100/250 drive
.It
Iomega Zip750 USB2.0 drive
.It
Keian USB1.1/2.0 3.5-inch HDD Case KU350A
.It
Kurouto Shikou USB 2.5-inch HDD Case GAWAP2.5PS-USB2.0
.It
LaCie P3 HardDrive USB 200GB
.It
Logitec LDR-H443U2 DVD-RAM/-R/+R/-RW/+RW drive
.It
Logitec Mobile USB Memory LMC-256UD
.It
Logitec USB1.1/2.0 HDD Unit SHD-E60U2
.It
Logitec USB Double-Speed Floppy Drive LFD-31U2
.It
Logitec USB/IEEE1394 DVD-RAM/R/RW Unit LDR-N21FU2 (CDROM only)
.It
MELCO USB Flash Disk "ClipDrive", RUF-C32M, -C64M, -C128M, -C256M, -C512M
.It
MELCO USB Flash Disk "PetitDrive", RUF-32M, -64M, -128M, -256Mm
.It
MELCO USB2.0 Flash Disk "PetitDrive2", RUF-256M/U2, -512M/U2
.It
MELCO USB2.0 MO Drive MO-CH640U2
.It
Matshita CF-VFDU03 floppy drive
.It
Merlin SM300 MP3/WMA Player (256Mb)
.It
Microtech International, Inc.\& USB-SCSI-HD 50 USB to SCSI cable
.It
Motorola E398 Mobile Phone (TransFlash memory card)
.It
NOVAC USB2.0 2.5/3.5-inch HDD Case NV-HD351U
.It
PNY Attache Flash Drive
.It
Panasonic ("Matshita FDD CF-VFDU03")
.It
Panasonic KXL-CB20AN Portable DVD-ROM/CD-R/RW
.It
Panasonic KXL-CB35AN (DVD-ROM & CD-R/RW)
.It
Panasonic USB2.0 Portable CD-RW Drive KXL-RW40AN (CDROM only)
.It
Panasonic floppy drive
.It
Qware BeatZkey!\& Pro
.It
RATOC Systems USB2.0 Removable HDD Case U2-MDK1, U2-MDK1B
.It
SanDisk SDDR-31 (Compact Flash)
.It
SanDisk SDDR-75 (only Compact Flash port works)
.It
Sitecom CN-300 MultiFlash (MMC/SD, SmartMedia, CF, MemoryStick)
.It
Sony Portable CD-R/RW Drive CRX10U (CDROM only)
.It
TEAC Portable USB CD-ROM Unit CD-110PU/210PU
.It
Time DPA20B MP3 Player (1Gb)
.It
Trek Thumbdrive 8MB
.It
VAIO floppy drive (includes Y-E Data Flashbuster-U)
.It
Y-E Data floppy drive (720/1.44/2.88Mb)
.El
.Pp
Among the supported digital cameras are:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Asahi Optical (PENTAX) Optio 230 & 330
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device umass
device scbus
device da
device pass
.Ed
.Pp
Add the
.Nm
driver to the kernel.
.Pp
.Dl "camcontrol rescan 0"
.Pp
Rescan a Zip drive that was added after boot.
The command above
assumes that the Zip drive is on the first SCSI bus in the system.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
camcontrol rescan 0:0:0
camcontrol rescan 0:0:1
camcontrol rescan 0:0:2
camcontrol rescan 0:0:3
.Ed
.Pp
Rescan all slots on a multi-slot flash reader, where the slots map to separate
LUNs on a single SCSI ID.
Typically only the first slot will be enabled at boot time.
Again, this assumes that the flash reader is the first SCSI bus in the system.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bsdlabel -w da0 zip100
newfs da0c
mount -t ufs /dev/da0c /mnt
.Ed
.Pp
Write a disklabel to the Zip drive (see
.Xr vpo 4
for the
.Xr disktab 5
entry), creates the file system and mounts the new file system on /mnt.
.Pp
.Dl "newfs_msdos /dev/da0"
.Pp
Create a new FAT type file system.
Care should be taken not to run
.Xr newfs 8
on devices that already contain data, as this will result in the
information being lost.
.Pp
Many consumer devices such as digital cameras automatically create
.Tn MS-DOS
based file systems when storing information such as images and
videos.
These file systems can be accessed by specifying the file system
type as
.Cm msdosfs
when using
.Xr mount 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cfumass 4 ,
.Xr ehci 4 ,
.Xr ohci 4 ,
.Xr uhci 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr vpo 4 ,
.Xr xhci 4 ,
.Xr disktab 5 ,
.Xr bsdlabel 8 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.\".Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An MAEKAWA Masahide Aq Mt bishop@rr.iij4u.or.jp
and
.An Nick Hibma Aq Mt n_hibma@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Nick Hibma Aq Mt n_hibma@FreeBSD.org .
