.\"	$OpenBSD: umb.4,v 1.19 2024/05/23 08:06:22 kevlo Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 genua mbH
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 23 2024 $
.Dt UMB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm umb
.Nd USB Mobile Broadband Interface Model (MBIM)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "umb*  at uhub?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB MBIM devices.
.Pp
MBIM devices establish connections via cellular networks such as
GPRS, UMTS, and LTE.
They appear as a regular point-to-point network interface,
transporting raw IP frames.
Once a connection is established,
the device will automatically set an IP address
and send out a nameserver proposal,
which
.Xr resolvd 8
can act on.
.Pp
Required configuration parameters like PIN and APN have to be set
with
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
Once the SIM card has been unlocked with the correct PIN, it
will remain in this state until the MBIM device is power-cycled.
In case the device is connected to an "always-on" USB port,
it may be possible to connect to a provider without entering the
PIN again even if the system was rebooted.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following devices should work:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Dell DW5821e
.It Ericsson H5321gw and N5321gw
.It Fibocom L831-EAU
.\" .It Huawei ME906s -- attaches but needs more work
.It Medion Mobile S4222 (MediaTek OEM)
.It Quectel EC25
.It Quectel EM060K
.It Quectel RM500Q
.It SIMCom SIM7600
.It SIMCom SIM8262E-M2
.It Sierra Wireless EM7345
.It Sierra Wireless EM7455
.It Sierra Wireless EM8805
.It Sierra Wireless MC8305
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures umb0 to set the APN to
.Dq internet ,
enabling data roaming,
and obtaining an IP address using IPv6 stateless address autoconfiguration:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pin 1234
apn internet
inet6 autoconf
roaming
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr route 8
.Rs
.%T "Universal Serial Bus Communications Class Subclass Specification for Mobile Broadband Interface Model"
.%U https://www.usb.org/document-library/mobile-broadband-interface-model-v10-errata-1-and-adopters-agreement
.Re
.Sh CAVEATS
Devices which fail to provide a conforming MBIM implementation will
probably be attached as some other driver, such as
.Xr umsm 4 .
