.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Lev Serebryakov <lev@FreeBSD.org>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 26, 2017
.Dt UMCS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm umcs
.Nd USB support for serial adapters based on the MCS7820 and MCS7840 chips
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device ucom"
.Cd "device umcs"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
umcs_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various multiport serial adapters based on the MosCom
MCS7820 and MCS7840 chips.
They are 2- or 4-port adapters with full-featured
16550-compatible UARTs and very flexible baud generators.
Also, these chips
support RS422/RS485 and IrDA operations.
.Pp
The device is accessed through the
.Xr ucom 4
driver which makes it behave like a
.Xr tty 4 .
.Pp
Different ports on device are presented as sub-units, like
.Pa /dev/ttyU0.1
and
.Pa /dev/ttyU0.2 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver was tested on the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
ST Lab U-360 two-port serial USB adapter
.It
ST Lab U-400 four-port serial USB adapter
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/ttyU*.*.init" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*.*
for callin ports
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*.*.init
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*.*.lock
corresponding callin initial-state and lock-state devices
.Pp
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*.*
for callout ports
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*.*.init
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*.*.lock
corresponding callout initial-state and lock-state devices
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ucom 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
appeared in ports since December of 2010.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Lev Serebryakov Aq Mt lev@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
This driver doesn't support access to any fine tunes of
chip, like RS522/RS485 mode, non-standard baudrates, etc.
