.\" Copyright (c) 1999
.\"	Nick Hibma <n_hibma@FreeBSD.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 24, 2018
.Dt UMS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ums
.Nd USB mouse driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ums"
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ums_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for mice that attach to the USB port.
Supported are
mice with any number of buttons and mice with a wheel.
.Pp
The
.Pa /dev/ums0
device presents the mouse as a
.Ar sysmouse
or
.Ar mousesystems
type device.
See
.Xr moused 8
for an explanation of these mouse types.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.usb.ums.debug
Debug output level, where 0 is debugging disabled and larger values increase
debug message verbosity.
Default is 0.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/ums0 -compact
.It Pa /dev/ums0
blocking device node
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Use the first
USB mouse on the system as your console mouse:
.Pp
.Dl moused -p /dev/ums0 -t auto
.Pp
To be able to use the USB mouse under X, change the "Pointer" section in
.Nm xorg.conf
to the following:
.Pp
.Dl Device "/dev/ums0"
.Dl Protocol "Auto"
.Pp
If you want to be able to use the mouse in both virtual consoles as well
as in X change it to:
.Pp
.Dl Device "/dev/sysmouse"
.Dl Protocol "Auto"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ohci 4 ,
.Xr sysmouse 4 ,
.Xr uhci 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr xorg.conf 5 Pq Pa ports/x11/xorg ,
.Xr moused 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Lennart Augustsson Aq Mt augustss@cs.chalmers.se
for
.Nx
and was adopted for
.Fx
by
.An MAEKAWA Masahide Aq Mt bishop@rr.iij4u.or.jp .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Nick Hibma Aq Mt n_hibma@FreeBSD.org
with input from
.An Kazutaka YOKOTA Aq Mt yokota@zodiac.mech.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp .
