.\"	$OpenBSD: uonerng.4,v 1.4 2022/02/18 10:24:32 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Devin Reade <gdr@gno.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 18 2022 $
.Dt ONERNG 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uonerng
.Nd Moonbase Otago OneRNG TRNG
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "uonerng* at uhub?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Moonbase Otago OneRNG, a USB true random
number generator (TRNG).
.Nm
reads raw entropy from the OneRNG and uses
.Xr enqueue_randomness 9
to add it to the system entropy pool.
.Pp
The OneRNG is capable of operating in one of several modes, some of
which are intended for production use and some of which are for testing
and validating the hardware.
.Pp
.Nm
operates in the
.Qq Avalanche noise with whitener
mode,
which is also the manufacturer's default mode.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr enqueue_randomness 9
.Pp
Moonbase Otago:
.Lk https://onerng.info/onerng
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 5.9 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Devin Reade Aq Mt gdr@gno.org .
.Sh BUGS
The OneRNG permits downloading of the device firmware so that one may check
the firmware's cryptographic signature as provided by the manufacturer.
The
.Nm
driver does not perform nor support this action.
In order to currently perform such a validation,
it would be necessary to disable
.Nm
in the kernel and then download the firmware via the OneRNG's
emulated AT modem command set.
