.\" $OpenBSD: upgt.4,v 1.6 2008/04/17 14:01:22 jmc Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Marcus Glocker <mglocker@openbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2005-2007
.\"     Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Theo de Raadt.
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 17, 2008
.Dt UPGT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm upgt
.Nd Conexant/Intersil PrismGT SoftMAC USB IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network
device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ehci"
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device upgt"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_upgt_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the USB 2.0 Conexant/Intersil PrismGT series wireless
adapters based on the GW3887 chipset.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.\" .It IBSS mode
.\" Also known as
.\" .Em IEEE ad-hoc
.\" mode or
.\" .Em peer-to-peer
.\" mode.
.\" This is the standardized method of operating without an access point.
.\" Stations associate with a service set.
.\" However, actual connections between stations are peer-to-peer.
.\" .It Host AP
.\" In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
.\" for other cards.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
supports software WEP.
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) is the de facto encryption standard
for wireless networks.
It can be typically configured in one of three modes:
no encryption; 40-bit encryption; or 104-bit encryption.
Unfortunately, due to serious weaknesses in WEP protocol
it is strongly recommended that it not be used as the
sole mechanism to secure wireless communication.
WEP is not enabled by default.
.\".Pp
.\"The transmit speed is user-selectable or can be adapted automatically by the
.\"driver depending on the received signal strength and on the number of hardware
.\"transmission retries.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh FILES
.\".Pp
.\"These firmware files are not free because Conexant/Intersil refuses
.\"to grant distribution rights.
.\"As a result, even though
.\".Ox
.\"includes the driver, the firmware files cannot be included and
.\"users have to download these files on their own.
This driver requires the
.Nm upgtfw
firmware to be installed before it will work.
The firmware files are not publicly available.
A package of the firmware which can be installed via
.Xr pkg_add 1
is available:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
http://weongyo.org/project/upgt/upgt-firmware-2.13.1.0.tar.gz
.Ed
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports USB 2.0 Conexant/Intersil PrismGT series wireless
adapters based on the GW3887 chipset, among them:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Belkin F5D7050 (version 1000)
.It
Cohiba Proto Board
.It
D-Link DWL-G120 Cohiba
.It
FSC Connect2Air E-5400 USB D1700
.It
Gigaset USB Adapter 54
.It
Inventel UR045G
.It
Netgear WG111v1 (rev2)
.It
SMC EZ ConnectG SMC2862W-G
.It
Sagem XG703A
.It
Spinnaker DUT
.It
Spinnaker Proto Board
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev upgt0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
    netmask 0xffffff00
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wlan create wlandev upgt0 ssid my_net up"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev upgt0 ssid my_net \e
        wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 weptxkey 1 up
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Marcus Glocker Aq Mt mglocker@openbsd.org .
.Pp
The hardware specification was reverse engineered by the people at
.Pa http://www.prism54.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver just supports the USB 2.0 devices (GW3887 chipset) but not the
USB 1.0 devices containing the NET2280, ISL3880, and ISL3886 chipsets.
Some further efforts would be necessary to add USB 1.0 support to the
driver.
