.\" $OpenBSD: ural.4,v 1.26 2025/03/25 19:57:54 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005-2007
.\"	Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 25 2025 $
.Dt URAL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ural
.Nd Ralink Technology/MediaTek USB IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ural* at uhub? port ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports USB 2.0 wireless adapters based on the Ralink RT2500USB
chipset.
.Pp
The RT2500USB chipset is the first generation of 802.11b/g adapters from Ralink.
It consists of two integrated chips, an RT2570 MAC/BBP and an RT2526 radio
transceiver.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It IBSS mode
Also known as
.Em IEEE ad-hoc
mode or
.Em peer-to-peer
mode.
This is the standardized method of operating without an access point.
Stations associate with a service set.
However, actual connections between stations are peer-to-peer.
.It Host AP
In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
for other cards.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
The
.Nm
driver relies on the software 802.11 stack for both encryption and decryption
of data frames.
.Pp
The transmit speed is user-selectable or can be adapted automatically by the
driver depending on the number of hardware transmission retries.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The following adapters should work:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It AMIT WL532U
.It ASUS WL-167g v1
.It Belkin F5D7050 v2000
.It Buffalo WLI-U2-KG54
.It Buffalo WLI-U2-KG54-AI
.It Buffalo WLI-U2-KG54-YB
.It CNet CWD-854
.It Compex WLU54G 2A1100
.It Conceptronic C54RU
.It D-Link DWL-G122 (b1)
.It Dynalink WLG25USB
.It E-Tech WGUS02
.It Eminent EM3035
.It Gigabyte GN-WBKG
.It Hercules HWGUSB2-54
.It KCORP LifeStyle KLS-685
.It Linksys HU200-TS
.It Linksys WUSB54G v4
.It Linksys WUSB54GP v4
.It MSI MS-6861
.It MSI MS-6865
.It MSI MS-6869
.It Nintendo Wi-Fi USB Connector
.It Nova Tech NV-902W
.It OvisLink Evo-W54USB
.It SerComm UB801R
.It SparkLAN WL-685R
.It Sphairon UB801R
.It Surecom EP-9001-g rev 3A
.It Sweex LC100060
.It Tonze UW-6200C
.It Zaapa ZNWUSB-54
.It Zinwell ZPlus-G250
.It Zinwell ZWX-G261
.It Zonet ZEW2500P
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig ural0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures ural0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nwid mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example creates a host-based access point on boot:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mediaopt hostap
nwid mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ural0: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Damien Bergamini Aq Mt damien.bergamini@free.fr .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver supports automatic control of the transmit speed in BSS mode only.
Therefore the use of an
.Nm
adapter in Host AP mode is discouraged.
.Pp
Host AP mode doesn't support power saving.
Clients attempting to use power saving mode may experience significant
packet loss (disabling power saving on the client will fix this).
