.\"	$OpenBSD: url.4,v 1.21 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: url.4,v 1.4 2002/04/02 20:45:40 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt URL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm url
.Nd Realtek RTL8150L 10/100 USB Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "url*    at uhub?"
.Cd "urlphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB
.Tn Ethernet
adapters based on the Realtek RTL8150L USB-ether bridge chip.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Dv -offset indent -compact
.It Tn Abocom RTL8151
.It Tn BAFO BF-310
.It Tn Billionton USBKR-100
.It Tn Compex UE202-B
.It Tn GreenHouse GH-USB100B
.It Tn GreenHouse GH-USB100B with HomePNA
.It Tn Hawking Technology HUF11
.It Tn Linksys USB100M
.It Tn Longshine LCS-8138TX
.It Tn Melco Inc. LUA-KTX
.It Tn Micronet SP128AR
.It Tn NetComm NP1010
.It Tn OQO model 01 (10/100) Ethernet
.It Tn Repotec RP-USB100-A
.It Tn SMC 2208USB/ETH
.It Tn TRENDnet TU-ET100C
.It Tn Zt USB10/100
.It Tn ZyXEL Prestige
.It Tn Z-TEK ZK-R02
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "url0: watchdog timeout"
A packet was queued for transmission and a transmit command was
issued, however the device failed to acknowledge the transmission
before a timeout expired.
.It "url0: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr mii 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr uhub 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Shingo WATANABE Aq Mt nabe@nabechan.org .
