.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Michael Knudsen <mk@openbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\"    - Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    - Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
.\"      copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"      disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided
.\"      with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $OpenBSD: urndis.4,v 1.15 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 24, 2015
.Dt URNDIS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm urndis
.Nd USB Remote NDIS Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ehci"
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device xhci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device uether"
.Cd "device urndis"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_urndis_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides Ethernet access over Remote NDIS (RNDIS),
allowing mobile devices such as phones and tablets to provide network access.
It is often referred to as USB tethering,
and in most cases must be explicitly enabled on the device.
.Pp
.Nm
should work with any USB RNDIS devices,
such as those commonly found on Android devices.
It does not support different media types or options.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the
.Qq tethering
functionality of many Android devices.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cdce 4 ,
.Xr ipheth 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.7 .
The first
.Fx
release to include it was
.Fx 9.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jonathan Armani Aq Mt armani@openbsd.org ,
.An Michael Knudsen Aq Mt mk@openbsd.org ,
and
.An Fabien Romano Aq Mt fabien@openbsd.org .
It was ported to
.Fx
by
.An Hans Petter Selasky Aq Mt hps@FreeBSD.org .
