.\" $OpenBSD: urtwn.4,v 1.58 2025/03/27 15:12:14 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 27 2025 $
.Dt URTWN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm urtwn
.Nd Realtek RTL8188CU/RTL8188EU/RTL8188FTV/RTL8192CU/RTL8192EU USB IEEE 802.11b/g/n wireless
network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "urtwn* at uhub? port ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports USB 2.0 wireless network devices based on Realtek
RTL8188CU, RTL8188CE-VAU, RTL8188EU, RTL8188FTV, RTL8188RU, RTL8192CU
and RTL8192EU chipsets.
.Pp
The RTL8188CU, RTL8188EU and RTL8188FTV are highly integrated 802.11n adapters
that combine a MAC, a 1T1R capable baseband and an RF in a single chip.
They operate in the 2GHz spectrum only.
The RTL8188RU is a high-power variant of the RTL8188CU.
The RTL8188CE-VAU is a PCI Express Mini Card adapter that attaches
to the USB interface.
.Pp
The RTL8192CU and RTL8192EU are highly integrated multiple-in, multiple-out
(MIMO) 802.11n adapters that combine a MAC, a 2T2R capable baseband and an
RF in a single chip.
They operate in the 2GHz spectrum only.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The adapter needs firmware files to run, which are loaded on demand by
the driver when the device is attached:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/urtwn-rtl8192cT
.It Pa /etc/firmware/urtwn-rtl8192cU
.It Pa /etc/firmware/urtwn-rtl8192eu
.It Pa /etc/firmware/urtwn-rtl8188eu
.It Pa /etc/firmware/urtwn-rtl8188ftv
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The following adapters should work:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Airlink101 AWLL5088
.It Alfa AWUS036NHR
.It Approx APPUSB300NANO V1
.It Aus. Linx AL-9604R1S
.It Asus USB-N10 NANO
.It Asus USB-N10 NANO B1
.It B-Link BL-LW05-5R
.It Belkin F7D1102 Surf Wireless Micro
.It Comfast CF-WU710N v4
.It D-Link DWA-121
.It D-Link DWA-123 rev \&D1
.It D-Link DWA-125 rev \&D1
.It D-Link DWA-131 rev B, E1
.It D-Link DWA-133
.It D-Link DWA-135
.It Digitus DN-7042
.It Edimax EW-7811Un
.It Edimax EW-7811Un v2
.It EDUP EP-N8508
.It Elecom WDC-150SU2M
.It Full River FR-W100NUL
.It Hercules Wireless N USB Pico HWNUp-150
.It IO-DATA WN-G150UM
.It ISY IWL4000 USB Wireless Micro Adapter
.It Mercusys MW150US V2
.It Netgear WNA1000A
.It Netgear WNA1000M
.It Netgear WNA1000Mv2
.It On Networks N300MA
.It Patriot PCUSBW1150
.It Planex GW-USEco300
.It Planex GW-USNano2
.It Planex GW-USValue-EZ
.It Planex GW-USWExtreme
.It POWCHIP POW-N18
.It Prolink WN2201
.It Sitecom WL-365
.It Sitecom WLA-2100 v2
.It Solwise NET-WL-UMD-606N
.It TP-LINK TL-WN722N v2
.It TP-LINK TL-WN723N v3
.It TP-LINK TL-WN725N v2
.It TP-LINK TL-WN821N v4
.It TP-LINK TL-WN821N v5
.It TP-LINK TL-WN822N v4
.It TP-LINK TL-WN822N v5
.It TRENDnet TEW-648UBM
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig urtwn0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures urtwn0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
join mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "urtwn0: error N, could not read firmware ..."
For some reason, the driver was unable to read the microcode file from the
filesystem.
The file might be missing or corrupted.
.It "urtwn0: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.9 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Damien Bergamini Aq Mt damien.bergamini@free.fr .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver does not support any of the 802.11n capabilities offered by the
adapters.
Additional work is required in
.Xr ieee80211 9
before those features can be supported.
