.\" $OpenBSD: urtw.4,v 1.31 2025/03/27 15:12:14 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Weongyo Jeong <weongyo@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 27 2025 $
.Dt URTW 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm urtw
.Nd Realtek RTL8187L/RTL8187B USB IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "urtw* at uhub? port ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports USB 802.11b/g wireless adapters based on the
Realtek RTL8187L and RTL8187B.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
The
.Nm
driver relies on the software 802.11 stack for both encryption and decryption
of data frames.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The following adapters should work:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Alfa AWUS036H
.It ASUS P5B Deluxe
.It Belkin F5D7050E
.It Digitus DN-7003GT
.It Linksys WUSB54GC v2
.It Netgear WG111v2
.It Netgear WG111v3
.It Shuttle XPC Accessory PN20
.It Sitecom WL-168 v1
.It Sitecom WL-168 v4
.It Surecom EP-9001-g rev 2A
.It TRENDnet TEW-424UB V3.xR
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig urtw0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures urtw0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
join mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.\".Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Pp
Realtek Semiconductor:
.Lk https://www.realtek.com/en
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Weongyo Jeong Aq Mt weongyo@FreeBSD.org .
