.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Hans Petter Selasky. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 24, 2018
.Dt USB_TEMPLATE 4
.Os
.
.Sh NAME
.
.
.Nm usb_template
.
.Nd "USB device side templates"
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this module into the kernel, place the following line in
your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device usb_template"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
usb_template_load="YES"
.Ed
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module implements various USB templates that are needed when
programming an USB device side driver.
.
A USB template consists of an USB device descriptor, one or more USB
configuration descriptors, one or more USB interface descriptors, one
or more USB endpoint descriptors, USB strings and additional USB
descriptors.
.
USB templates are selected using the
.Va hw.usb.template
sysctl and tunable,
or by using the
.Xr usbconfig 8
.Cm set_template
subcommand.
Changing the
.Va hw.usb.template
sysctl triggers reenumeration by the USB host; changes to other sysctls
may not be visible to the host until reenumeration is performed.
.Pp
Available templates are:
.Bl -column -offset 3n "Value"
.It Em Value Ta Em Description
.It Dv 0 Ta USB Mass Storage, see
.Xr cfumass 4
.It Dv 1 Ta CDC Ethernet, see
.Xr cdce 4
.It Dv 2 Ta Media Transfer Protocol (MTP)
.It Dv 3 Ta USB serial port, see
.Xr umodem 4
.It Dv 4 Ta USB audio
.It Dv 5 Ta USB keyboard
.It Dv 6 Ta USB mouse
.It Dv 7 Ta USB phone
.It Dv 8 Ta CDC Ethernet and serial port
.It Dv 9 Ta USB MIDI
.It Dv 10 Ta CDC Ethernet, serial port, and storage
.El
.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.usb.template
Currently selected template.
Set to -1 to make the device disappear from the USB host point of view.
.It Va hw.usb.template_power
USB bus power consumption in mA at 5V.
Must be between 0 and 500.
Setting to 0 marks the device as self-powered.
Defaults to 500mA.
.It Va hw.usb.templates.N
Configuration for template number
.Va N .
.It Va hw.usb.templates.N.vendor_id
16-bit vendor identifier (VID), usually assigned by USB-IF.
.It Va hw.usb.templates.N.product_id
16-bit product identifier (PID).
.It Va hw.usb.templates.N.manufacturer
String containing human-readable manufacturer name.
.It Va hw.usb.templates.N.product
String containing human-readable product name.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cfumass 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr usfs 4 ,
.Xr usbconfig 8
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
module complies to the USB 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 standard.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module was written by
.An Hans Petter Selasky Aq Mt hselasky@FreeBSD.org .
