.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Hans Petter Selasky
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 17, 2018
.Dt USFS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm usfs
.Nd USB device side support for bulk only transport mass storage
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device usfs"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
usfs_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bf -symbolic
This driver is obsolete.
Users are advised to use
.Xr cfumass 4
instead.
.Ef
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver provides support for emulating an USB mass storage device when
the USB stack is activated in USB device side mode (the
.Xr usb_template 4
module is loaded and the
.Va hw.usb.template
sysctl is set to 0).
.Pp
Upon attach the driver creates a RAM disk which can be read and written.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cfumass 4 ,
.Xr umass 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr usb_template 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Fx 8.0 .
