.\" $OpenBSD: uticom.4,v 1.8 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 2007
.\"     The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt UTICOM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uticom
.Nd Texas Instruments TUSB3410 USB serial adapter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "uticom* at uhub?"
.Cd "ucom*  at uticom?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports serial port functionality on devices based on the
Texas Instruments TUSB3410 serial to USB converter chip.
.Pp
The device is accessed through the
.Xr ucom 4
driver which makes it behave like a
.Xr tty 4 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ucom 4 ,
.Xr uhub 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Dmitry Komissaroff Aq Mt dxi@mail.ru
and
.An Hasso Tepper Aq Mt hasso@estpak.ee .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver doesn't support devices that have an internal EEPROM with firmware,
since such firmware is different to that supplied with
.Ox .
.Pp
Devices with multiple ports will attach all ports, though only
the first port can be used for now.
