.\" $OpenBSD: uts.4,v 1.13 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Robert Nagy <robert@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt UTS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uts
.Nd USB touchscreen support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "uts*     at uhub?"
.Cd "wsmouse* at uts? mux 0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB touchscreens.
Access to the touchscreen is provided through the
.Xr wscons 4
framework.
.Pp
Touching the screen will emulate mouse button 0 being pressed.
.Pp
The touchscreen sensor is poorly aligned, therefore
.Xr xtsscale 1
should be used to provide calibration results to the
.Nm
driver.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver works with the following touchscreens and panels:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
Gunze USB Touch Panel
.It
Hantouch
.It
LG L1510SF LCD Monitor
.It
Origin AE X15e HTPC case with 7" LCD
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtsscale 1 ,
.Xr uhub 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsmouse 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Robert Nagy Aq Mt robert@openbsd.org .
