.\" $NetBSD: uvisor.4,v 1.3 2001/01/23 21:31:10 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 26, 2017
.Dt UVISOR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uvisor
.Nd "USB support for the PalmOS based PDAs"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device ucom"
.Cd "device uvisor"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uvisor_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB based PalmOS PDAs, like Handspring
Visor, Palm Mxxx series, and Sony Clie.
.Pp
The device is accessed through the
.Xr ucom 4
driver which makes it behave like a
.Xr tty 4 .
The device has several ports for different purposes, each of them gets its
own
.Xr ucom 4
device.
The attach message describes the purpose of each port.
.Pp
The usual Pilot tools can be used to access the attached device on the
HotSync port.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following devices:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Aceeca Mez1000 RDA
.It
Handspring Treo
.It
Handspring Treo 600
.It
Handspring Visor
.It
Palm I705
.It
Palm M125
.It
Palm M130
.It
Palm M500
.It
Palm M505
.It
Palm M515
.It
Palm Tungsten T
.It
Palm Tungsten Z
.It
Palm Zire
.It
Palm Zire 31
.It
Sony Clie 4.0
.It
Sony Clie 4.1
.It
Sony Clie 5.0
.It
Sony Clie PEG-S500C
.It
Sony Clie NX60
.It
Sony Clie S360
.It
Sony Clie TJ37
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/ttyU*.init" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*
for callin ports
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*.init
.It Pa /dev/ttyU*.lock
corresponding callin initial-state and lock-state devices
.Pp
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*
for callout ports
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*.init
.It Pa /dev/cuaU*.lock
corresponding callout initial-state and lock-state devices
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ucom 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was adopted from
.Nx 1.5
in August 2002.
This manual page was adopted from
.Nx
by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org
at that time.
.Sh BUGS
The code to provide multiple
.Xr ucom 4
instances has not yet been ported from
.Nx .
It is unclear whether this driver works in its
current state.
