.\" $OpenBSD: uwacom.4,v 1.5 2023/08/12 20:49:29 miod Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Frank Groeneveld <frank@frankgroeneveld.nl>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 12 2023 $
.Dt UWACOM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uwacom
.Nd Wacom USB tablets
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "uwacom*  at uhidev?"
.Cd "wsmouse* at uwacom? mux 0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides basic support for Wacom USB tablets.
Access to these devices is through the
.Xr wscons 4
framework.
.Pp
Absolute positioning of the mouse cursor can be done by hovering the pen above
the tablet.
Touching the tablet with the pen tip will emulate mouse button 0,
while the two pen buttons will emulate button 1 and button 2.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following Wacom tablets:
.Bl -column "Intuos Draw" "Model Number" -offset 6n
.It Em Name Ta Em Model Number
.It Li Intuos Draw Ta CTL-490
.It Li Intuos S Ta CTL-4100
.It Li One S Ta CTL-472
.It Li One M Ta CTL-672
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr uhidev 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr wsmouse 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
first appeared in
.Ox 6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Frank Groeneveld Aq Mt frank@frankgroeneveld.nl .
Support for
.Dq S
models was written by
.An Vladimir Meshcheriakov Aq Mt vladimir.meshcheriakov@epita.fr .
.Sh CAVEATS
Advanced features such as pen tip pressure are not supported.
