.\"	$OpenBSD: viasio.4,v 1.6 2013/07/16 16:05:49 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Alexander Yurchenko <grange@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 16 2013 $
.Dt VIASIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm viasio
.Nd VIA VT1211 LPC Super I/O
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "viasio* at isa? port 0x2e flags 0x0000"
.Cd "viasio* at isa? port 0x4e flags 0x0000"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the VIA VT1211 LPC Super I/O IC.
The hardware monitoring and watchdog timer functions are currently
supported.
.Pp
The hardware monitor provides hardware monitoring capabilities
to be used with the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface.
The following monitoring sensors are available:
.Bl -column "Sensor" "UnitsXXXXX" "Typical" -offset indent
.It Sy "Sensor" Ta Sy "Units" Ta Sy "Typical use"
.It Li "TEMP1" Ta "uK" Ta "Pentium II type thermal diode"
.It Li "UCH1" Ta "uK or uV DC" Ta "CPU temperature"
.It Li "UCH2" Ta "uK or uV DC" Ta "System temperature"
.It Li "UCH3" Ta "uK or uV DC" Ta "CPU core voltage"
.It Li "UCH4" Ta "uK or uV DC" Ta "+5V"
.It Li "UCH5" Ta "uK or uV DC" Ta "+12V"
.It Li "+3.3V" Ta "uV" Ta "Internal +3.3V"
.It Li "FAN1" Ta "RPM" Ta "Fan tachometer"
.It Li "FAN2" Ta "RPM" Ta "Fan tachometer"
.El
.Pp
If the hardware monitor is not enabled by firmware, the driver can try
to enable it if value 0x0001 is present in the
.Ar flags .
Note that enabling the hardware monitor can lead to unexpected results.
.Pp
The watchdog timer provides a standard
.Xr watchdog 4
interface.
If the watchdog timer is not enabled by firmware, the driver can try
to enable it if value 0x0002 is present in the
.Ar flags .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.8 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Alexander Yurchenko Aq Mt grange@openbsd.org .
