.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Fabien Thomas <fabient@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS `AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 7, 2011
.Dt VIAWD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm viawd
.Nd device driver for VIA south bridge watchdog timer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device viawd"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
viawd_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Xr watchdog 4
support for the watchdog interrupt timer present on
VIA south bridge chipset (VT8251, CX700, VX800, VX855, VX900).
.Pp
The VIA south bridge have a built-in watchdog timer,
which can be enabled and disabled by user's program and set between
1 to 1023 seconds.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver when unloaded with running watchdog will reschedule the watchdog
to 5 minutes.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 8 ,
.Xr watchdogd 8 ,
.Xr watchdog 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Fabien Thomas Aq Mt fabient@FreeBSD.org .
