.\" Copyright (c) 2018 VMware, Inc.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-2-Clause OR GPL-2.0)
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd February 10, 2018
.Dt VMCI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vmci
.Nd VMware Virtual Machine Communication Interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device vmci"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_vmci_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the VMware Virtual Machine Communication Interface
(VMCI) in virtual machines by VMware.
.Pp
VMCI allows virtual machines to communicate with host kernel modules and the
VMware hypervisors.
User level applications in a virtual machine can use VMCI through vSockets
(also known as VMCI Sockets and not included in this kernel module), a socket
address family designed to be compatible with UDP and TCP at the interface
level.
Today, VMCI and vSockets are used by various VMware Tools components inside
the guest for zero-config, network-less access to VMware host services.
In addition to this, VMware's users are using vSockets for various
applications, where network access of the virtual machine is restricted
or non-existent.
Examples of this are VMs communicating with device proxies for proprietary
hardware running as host applications and automated testing of applications
running within virtual machines.
.Pp
In a virtual machine, VMCI is exposed as a regular PCI device.
The primary communication mechanisms supported are a point-to-point
bidirectional transport based on a pair of memory-mapped queues, and
asynchronous notifications in the form of datagrams and doorbells.
These features are available to kernel level components such as vSockets
through the VMCI kernel API.
In addition to this, the VMCI kernel API provides support for receiving
events related to the state of the VMCI communication channels, and the
virtual machine itself.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr pci 9
.Rs
.%T "VMware vSockets Documentation"
.%U https://www.vmware.com/support/developer/vmci-sdk/
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and man page were written by
.An Vishnu Dasa Aq Mt vdasahar@gmail.com .
