.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Peter Grehan
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 19, 2013
.Dt VMM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vmm.ko
.Nd "bhyve virtual machine monitor"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To load the driver as a module at boot, add this line to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.Cd vmm_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
The module can also be loaded manually with
.Xr kldload 8 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kldload vmm
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
provides the kernel portion of the
.Xr bhyve 4
hypervisor.
.Pp
An Intel CPU with VT-x/EPT or AMD CPU with SVM support is required.
.Pp
PCI device passthrough to a virtual machine requires
hardware with VT-d support.
.Sh PCI PASSTHROUGH
When the hardware supports VT-d, and
.Nm
has been loaded at boot time,
PCI devices can be reserved for use by the hypervisor.
Entries consisting of the PCI
.Ar bus Ns / Ns Ar slot Ns / Ns Ar function
are added to the
.Va pptdevs
.Xr loader.conf 5
variable.
Additional entries are separated by spaces.
Host PCI devices that match an entry will be assigned to the hypervisor
and will not be probed by
.Fx
device drivers.
See the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section below for sample usage.
.Pp
A large number of PCI device entries may require a string longer than the
128-character limit of
.Xr loader.conf 5
variables.
The
.Va pptdevs2
and
.Va pptdevs3
variables can be used for additional entries.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Reserve three PCI devices for use by the hypervisor: bus 10 slot 0 function 0,
bus 6 slot 5 function 0, and bus 6 slot 5 function 1.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pptdevs="10/0/0 6/5/0 6/5/1"
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bhyve 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr bhyve 8 ,
.Xr bhyveload 8 ,
.Xr kldload 8
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm vmm.ko
first appeared in
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Neel Natu Aq neel@freebsd.org
.An Peter Grehan Aq grehan@freebsd.org


