.\"	$OpenBSD: vmt.4,v 1.10 2021/01/15 06:16:21 jmatthew Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Marco Peereboom <marco@openbsd.org>
.\" Text was heavily borrowed from the IPMI spec V1.5
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 15 2021 $
.Dt VMT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vmt
.Nd VMware Tools driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "vmt0 at pvbus0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver is a kernel level implementation of VMware Tools.
VMware Tools are intended to provide better support for operating systems
running inside virtual machines.
.Pp
.Nm
handles shutdown and reboot requests from the host by signalling
.Xr init 8
with
.Dv SIGUSR2
and
.Dv SIGINT
respectively.
.Nm
will log notifications that the guest has been suspended or resumed by the
host.
It also provides access to the host machine's clock as a timedelta sensor.
.Pp
.Nm
reports the guest's hostname and all non-loopback IP addresses to the host.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pvbus 4 ,
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Pp
A
.Sy vmwh
helper program is available via
.Xr packages 7 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.4 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An David Gwynne Aq Mt dlg@openbsd.org .
