.\" Copyright (c) 1998, 1999, Nicolas Souchu
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 14, 2004
.Dt VPO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vpo
.Nd parallel to SCSI interface driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device vpo"
.Pp
For one or more SCSI busses:
.Cd "device scbus"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provide access to parallel port Iomega Zip and Jaz drives.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following parallel to SCSI interfaces:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Adaptec AIC-7110 Parallel to SCSI interface (built-in to Iomega ZIP
drives)
.It
Iomega Jaz Traveller interface
.It
Iomega MatchMaker SCSI interface (built-in to Iomega ZIP+ drives)
.El
.Sh USAGE
The driver should let you use a printer connected to the drive while
transferring data.
.Pp
DOS and
.Fx
file systems are supported.
When mounting a DOS file system or
formatting a
.Fx
file system, check the slice of the disk with the
.Xr gpart 8
utility.
.Pp
In order to unixify a ZIP disk, put the following in /etc/disktab:
.Bd -literal
zip|zip 100:\\
        :ty=removable:se#512:nc#96:nt#64:ns#32:\\
        :pa#196608:oa#0:ba#4096:fa#512:\\
        :pb#196608:ob#0:bb#4096:fb#512:\\
        :pc#196608:oc#0:bc#4096:fc#512:
.Ed
.Pp
and use
.Xr bsdlabel 8 .
.Pp
If you have trouble with your driver, your parallel chipset may not run
properly at the detected mode (NIBBLE, PS2 or EPP).
Tune the
.Xr ppc 4
bootflags to force other modes.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr lpt 4 ,
.Xr ppbus 4 ,
.Xr ppc 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This
manual page was written by
.An Nicolas Souchu .
.Sh BUGS
During boot, the driver first tries to detect a classic ZIP, then a ZIP+.
The ZIP+ detection is intrusive and may send erroneous characters to your
printer if the drive is not connected to your parallel port.
