.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Pyun YongHyeon
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 30, 2010
.Dt VTE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vte
.Nd Vortex86 RDC R6040 Fast Ethernet driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device vte"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_vte_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for RDC R6040 Fast Ethernet controller
which is commonly found on Vortex86 System On a Chip (SoC).
.Pp
The RDC R6040 has integrated 10/100 PHY for 10/100Mbps support in full
or half-duplex.
The controller supports interrupt moderation mechanism, a 64-bit multicast
hash filter, VLAN over-size frame and four station addresses.
The
.Nm
device driver uses three station addresses out of four as perfect
multicast filter.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for the following Ethernet controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
DM&P Vortex86 RDC R6040 Fast Ethernet controller
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va hw.vte.tx_deep_copy
The RDC R6040 controller has no auto-padding support for short
frames and the controller's DMA engine does not have capability to
handle multiple buffers for a TX frame such that driver has to
create a single contiguous TX buffer.
This hardware limitation leads to poor TX performance since most of
CPU cycles are wasted on both de-fragmenting mbuf chains and padding.
This tunable enables deep copy operation for TX frames such that
driver will spend less CPU cycles in de-fragmentation with the
cost of extra TX buffer memory.
The default value is 1 to use deep copy.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va dev.vte.%d.rx_mod
Maximum number of packets to fire RX completion interrupt.
The accepted range is 0 to 15, the default is 15.
.It Va dev.vte.%d.tx_mod
Maximum number of packets to fire TX completion interrupt.
The accepted range is 0 to 15, the default is 15.
.It Va dev.vte.%d.stats
Show hardware MAC statistics maintained in driver.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T "DM&P Electronics Inc. Vortex86"
.%U http://www.dmp.com.tw
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Pyun YongHyeon Aq Mt yongari@FreeBSD.org .
It first appeared in
.Fx 8.3 .
