.\"	$OpenBSD: we.4,v 1.16 2015/09/10 15:16:43 schwarze Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: we.4,v 1.4 1998/08/09 00:39:02 thorpej Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jason R. Thorpe of the Numerical Aerospace Simulation Facility,
.\" NASA Ames Research Center.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 10 2015 $
.Dt WE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm we
.Nd Western Digital/SMC WD80x3, SMC Elite Ultra, and SMC EtherEZ Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "we0 at isa? port 0x280 iomem 0xd0000 irq 9"
.Cd "we1 at isa? port 0x300 iomem 0xcc000 irq 10"
.Cd "we* at isapnp?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports Western Digital/SMC WD80x3, SMC Elite Ultra, and
SMC EtherEZ Ethernet cards.
.Sh MEDIA SELECTION
The ability to select media from software is dependent on the particular
model of WD/SMC card.
The following models support only manual configuration: WD8003S, WD8003E,
and WD8013EBT.
.Pp
Other WD/SMC 80x3 interfaces support two types of media on a single card.
All support the AUI media type.
The other media is either BNC or UTP being a transceiver.
Software cannot differentiate between BNC and UTP cards.
On some models, the AUI port is always active.
.Pp
The SMC Elite Ultra and SMC EtherEZ interfaces support three media on
a single card: AUI, BNC, and UTP.
If the transceiver is active, the BNC media is selected.
Otherwise, the AUI and UTP ports are both active.
Cards of this vintage may also be found which lack one or two of the
connectors.
These cards also know what interrupt they are configured for, and will
correct such problems (for further interrupt issues, see
.Xr isa 4
and
.Xr pci 4 ) .
.Pp
The SMC EtherEZ does not yet work correctly in
.Xr isapnp 4
mode.
The SMC Elite Ultra does not work in
.Dq soft configuration
mode.
.Pp
To enable the AUI media, select the
.Em 10base5
or
.Em aui
media type with
.Xr ifconfig 8 Ns 's
.Sq media
directive.
To select the other media (transceiver), select the
.Em 10base2
or
.Em bnc
media type.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "we0: overriding IRQ <n> to <m>"
The IRQ specified in the kernel configuration file is different from that
found in the card's configuration registers.
The value in the kernel configuration file is being overridden by the one
configured into the card.
.It "we0: can't wildcard IRQ on a <model>"
The IRQ was wildcarded in the kernel configuration file, and the card is
a WD8003S, WD8003E, or WD8013EBT, which do not support software IRQ
configuration.
.It "we0: failed to clear shared memory at offset <off>"
The memory test was unable to clear the interface's shared memory
region.
This often indicates that the card is configured at a conflicting
.Em iomem
address.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr isapnp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
