.\" Copyright (c) 2014-2017 Vladimir Kondratyev <wulf@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 19, 2017
.Dt WMT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wmt
.Nd MS Windows 7/8/10 - compatible USB HID multi-touch device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device wmt"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device evdev"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
wmt_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the MS Windows 7/8/10 - compatible USB HID
multi-touch devices found in many laptops.
.Pp
To get multi-touch device working in
.Xr X 7 ,
install
.Pa ports/x11-drivers/xf86-input-evdev .
.Sh FILES
.Nm
creates a pseudo-device file,
.Pa /dev/input/eventX
which presents the multi-touch device as an input event device.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr xorg.conf 5 Pq Pa ports/x11/xorg ,
.Xr evdev 4 Pq Pa ports/x11-drivers/xf86-input-evdev .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Vladimir Kondratyev Aq Mt wulf@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
works only with touchscreens now.
Neither pens nor touchpads are supported.
.Pp
.Nm
cannot act like
.Xr sysmouse 4 ,
as
.Xr sysmouse 4
does not support absolute motion events.
