.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2007
.\"	Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>. All rights reserved.
.\"	Benjamin Close <Benjamin.Close@clearchain.com>. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Andriy Voskoboinyk <avos@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice unmodified, this list of conditions, and the following
.\"    disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 31, 2016
.Dt WPI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wpi
.Nd "Intel 3945ABG Wireless LAN IEEE 802.11 driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device wpi"
.Cd "device wpifw"
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Cd "device wlan_amrr"
.Cd "device firmware"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_wpi_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn Intel
3945ABG Wireless network adapter.
The driver supports
.Cm station ,
.Cm adhoc ,
.Cm adhoc-demo ,
.Cm hostap ,
and
.Cm monitor
mode operation.
Only one virtual interface may be configured at any time.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA-PSK and WPA2-PSK).
WPA is the de facto encryption standard for wireless networks.
It is strongly recommended that WEP
not be used as the sole mechanism
to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses in it.
The
.Nm
driver offloads both encryption and decryption of data frames to the
hardware for the CCMP cipher.
.Pp
This driver requires the firmware built with the
.Nm wpifw 4
module to work.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/intel_wpi.LICENSE" -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/intel_wpi.LICENSE
.Nm
firmware license
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev wpi0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
    netmask 0xffffff00
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev wpi0 ssid my_net up"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev wpi0 ssid my_net \e
	wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 weptxkey 1 up
.Ed
.Pp
Create an IBSS network with 128-bit WEP encryption on the channel 4:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev wpi0 wlanmode adhoc ssid my_net \e
	wepmode on wepkey 0x01020304050607080910111213 weptxkey 1 \e
	channel 4
.Ed
.Pp
Join/create an 802.11b IBSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev wpi0 wlanmode adhoc
ifconfig wlan0 inet 192.168.0.22 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
	mode 11b
.Ed
.Pp
Create an 802.11g host-based access point:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan0 create wlandev wpi0 wlanmode hostap
ifconfig wlan0 inet 192.168.0.10 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_ap \e
	mode 11g
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "wpi%d: could not load firmware image '%s'"
The driver failed to load the firmware image using the
.Xr firmware 9
subsystem.
Verify the
.Xr wpifw 4
firmware module is installed.
.It "wpi%d: %s: timeout waiting for adapter to initialize, error %d"
The onboard microcontroller failed to initialize in time.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: %s: could not load boot firmware"
An attempt to upload the boot firmware image to the onboard microcontroller
failed.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
The driver will reset the hardware and continue.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: scan timeout"
Firmware scan command response was not received in time.
The driver will reset the hardware and continue.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: fatal firmware error"
The onboard microcontroller crashed for some reason.
The driver will reset the hardware and continue.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: RF switch: radio disabled"
The hardware switch controlling the radio is currently turned off.
Data transmission is not possible in this state.
.It "wpi%d: can't map mem space"
The driver was unable to map the device registers into the host address space.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: can't map interrupt"
The driver was unable to allocate an IRQ for the device interrupt.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: can't establish interrupt, error %d"
The driver was unable to install the device interrupt handler.
This should not happen.
.It "wpi%d: %s: bus_dmamap_load failed, error %d"
The driver was unable to map newly allocated mbuf to device
visible address space.
Contents of currently received frame will be lost.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr wlan_amrr 4 ,
.Xr wlan_ccmp 4 ,
.Xr wlan_tkip 4 ,
.Xr wlan_wep 4 ,
.Xr wlan_xauth 4 ,
.Xr wpifw 4 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The original
.Nm
driver was written for
.Ox
by
.An Damien Bergamini Aq Mt damien.bergamini@free.fr .
.An Benjamin Close Aq Mt benjsc@FreeBSD.org
ported
.Nm
to
.Fx .
.Sh CAVEATS
Hostap mode is not directly supported by the device;
it is implemented through IBSS mode (as a result, DFS/passive
channels are not available in this mode).
.Pp
Powersave may be unstable on some networks (results in
occasional 'wpi%d: device timeout' messages); you can try
to disable it to improve device stability.
