.\" $OpenBSD: wskbd.4,v 1.25 2025/08/16 11:28:25 matthieu Exp $
.\" $NetBSD: wskbd.4,v 1.5 2000/03/20 11:51:59 pk Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999
.\" 	Matthias Drochner.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 16 2025 $
.Dt WSKBD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wskbd
.Nd generic keyboard support in wscons
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "wskbd* at ..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver handles common tasks for keyboards within the
.Xr wscons 4
framework.
It is attached to the hardware specific keyboard drivers and
provides their connection to
.Dq wsdisplay
devices and a character device interface.
.Pp
The common keyboard support consists of:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Mapping from keycodes (defined by the specific keyboard driver) to
keysyms (hardware independent, defined in
.Pa /usr/include/dev/wscons/wsksymdef.h ) .
.It
Handling of
.Dq compose
sequences.
Characters commonly not present as separate keys on keyboards
can be generated after either a special
.Dq compose
key is pressed or a
.Dq dead accent
character is used.
.It
Certain translations, like turning an
.Dq ALT
modifier into an
.Dq ESC
prefix.
.It
Automatic key repetition
.Pf ( Dq typematic ) .
.It
Parameter handling for
.Dq keyboard bells .
.It
Generation of
.Dq keyboard events
for use by X servers.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver provides a number of ioctl functions to control key maps
and other parameters.
These functions are accessible through the associated
.Dq wsdisplay
device as well.
A complete list is in
.Pa /usr/include/dev/wscons/wsconsio.h .
The
.Xr wsconsctl 8
utility allows access to key maps and other variables.
.Pp
The
.Em console
locator in the configuration line refers to the device's use as input
part of the operating system console.
A device specification containing a positive value here will only match
if the device is in use as system console.
(The console device selection in early system startup is not influenced.)
This way, the console device can be connected to a known
.Nm wskbd
device instance.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver traps certain key sequences intended to perform special functions.
The
.Cm Ctrl+Alt+Esc
sequence will initiate the
.Xr ddb 4
kernel debugger if the
.Dq ddb.console
.Xr sysctl 8
variable is set.
When attached to a
.Xr wsdisplay 4
device,
.Cm Ctrl+Alt+Fx
switches virtual terminals and the
.Cm Shift+PgUp
and
.Cm Shift+PgDn
combinations provide scrollback functionality if the underlying hardware
driver supports it.
When audio devices are supported, keys
.Cm Mute ,
.Cm VolumeUp
and
.Cm VolumeDown
tweak mixer settings.
.Ss Keyboard encodings
The following encodings are supported.
Device drivers for legacy keyboard interfaces may only support a subset
of these.
However, generally, all encodings are supported by
.Xr pckbd 4
and
.Xr ukbd 4 .
.Bl -column ".Li us.colemak" ".Dv KB_US|KB_COLEMAK"
.It Sy "wsconsctl" Ta Sy "define" Ta Sy "language"
.It Li user Ta Dv KB_USER Ta User-defined
.It Li us Ta Dv KB_US Ta English/US keyboard mapping (default)
.It Li uk Ta Dv KB_UK Ta English/UK keyboard mapping
.It Li be Ta Dv KB_BE Ta Belgian
.It Li br Ta Dv KB_BR Ta Brazilian with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li cf Ta Dv KB_CF Ta Canadian French
.It Li dk Ta Dv KB_DK Ta Danish with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li nl Ta Dv KB_NL Ta Dutch
.It Li ee Ta Dv KB_EE Ta Estonian with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li fr Ta Dv KB_FR Ta French
.It Li de Ta Dv KB_DE Ta German QWERTZ with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li hu Ta Dv KB_HU Ta Hungarian
.It Li is Ta Dv KB_IS Ta Icelandic with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li it Ta Dv KB_IT Ta Italian
.It Li jp Ta Dv KB_JP Ta Japanese
.It Li la Ta Dv KB_LA Ta Latin American Spanish
.It Li no Ta Dv KB_NO Ta Norwegian with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li pl Ta Dv KB_PL Ta Polish
.It Li pt Ta Dv KB_PT Ta Portuguese
.It Li ru Ta Dv KB_RU Ta Russian
.It Li es Ta Dv KB_ES Ta Spanish
.It Li sv Ta Dv KB_SV Ta Swedish with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li sf Ta Dv KB_SF Ta Swiss French
.It Li sg Ta Dv KB_SG Ta Swiss German
.It Li tr Ta Dv KB_TR Ta Turkish (QWERTY) with
.Dq dead accents
.It Li ua Ta Dv KB_UA Ta Ukrainian
.It Li us.declk Ta Dv "KB_US|KB_DECLK" Ta English/US mapping for
.Tn DEC LK400 Ns - Ns style
keyboards with PC keyboard interface (e.g.,
.Tn LK461 )
.It Li us.dvorak Ta Dv "KB_US|KB_DVORAK" Ta English/US keyboard with
.Dq Dvorak
layout
.It Li us.colemak Ta Dv "KB_US|KB_COLEMAK" Ta English/US keyboard with
.Dq Colemak
layout
.El
.Pp
The
.Dq Li \&.nodead
suffix
.Dv ( KB_NODEAD
flag)
can be applied to layouts with
.Dq dead accents
to switch them off.
.Pp
The
.Dv KB_US ,
.Dv KB_UK ,
.Dv KB_FR ,
.Dv KB_JP
and
.Dv KB_US|KB_DVORAK
mappings can be modified
to swap the left
.Aq Ctrl
and the
.Aq CapsLock
keys by the
.Dv KB_SWAPCTRLCAPS
variant bit or the
.Dq Li .swapctrlcaps
suffix.
.Pp
The
.Dq Li .metaesc
suffix
.Dv ( KB_METAESC
flag)
option can be applied to any layout.
If set, keys pressed together
with the
.Tn ALT
modifier are prefixed by an
.Tn ESC
character.
(Standard behaviour is to add 128 to the
.Tn ASCII
value.)
.Ss Ioctls
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls are provided by the
.Nm
driver or by devices which use it.
Their definitions are found in
.In dev/wscons/wsconsio.h .
.Bl -tag -width Dv
.It Dv WSKBDIO_GTYPE
Get the keyboard type.
.It Dv WSKBDIO_GETMODE
Get the keyboard mode, 0 means translated through keyboard map, 1 means raw.
.It Dv WSKBDIO_SETMODE
Set the keyboard mode.
.It Dv WSKBDIO_COMPLEXBELL , WSKBDIO_SETBELL , WSKBDIO_GETBELL , WSKBDIO_SETDEFAULTBELL , WSKBDIO_GETDEFAULTBELL Pq Vt "struct wskbd_bell_data"
Get and set keyboard bell settings.
.It Dv WSKBDIO_SETKEYREPEAT , WSKBDIO_GETKEYREPEAT , WSKBDIO_SETDEFAULTKEYREPEAT , WSKBDIO_GETDEFAULTKEYREPEAT Pq Vt "struct wskbd_keyrepeat_data"
Get and set keyboard autorepeat settings.
.It Dv WSKBDIO_SETLEDS , WSKBDIO_GETLEDS Pq Vt "int"
Get and set keyboard LED settings.
.It Dv WSKBDIO_GETMAP , WSKBDIO_SETMAP Pq Vt "struct wskbd_map_data"
Get and set keyboard keymapping settings.
.It Dv WSKBDIO_GETBACKLIGHT, WSKBDIO_SETBACKLIGHT Pq Vt "struct wskbd_backlight"
Get and set keyboard backlight
.It Dv WSKBDIO_GETENCODING , WSKBDIO_SETENCODING Pq Vt "kbd_t"
Get and set keyboard encoding settings.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/include/dev/wscons/wsksymdef.h -compact
.It Pa /dev/wskbd*
.It Pa /usr/include/dev/wscons/wsksymdef.h
.It Pa /usr/include/dev/wscons/wsconsio.h
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr akbd 4 ,
.Xr comkbd 4 ,
.Xr hilkbd 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pckbd 4 ,
.Xr ukbd 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsmux 4 ,
.Xr zskbd 4 ,
.Xr wsconsctl 8
