.\" $OpenBSD: wsmux.4,v 1.17 2025/08/16 13:33:48 jsg Exp $
.\" $NetBSD: wsmux.4,v 1.2 1999/11/03 22:01:40 castor Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 16 2025 $
.Dt WSMUX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wsmux
.Nd console keyboard/mouse multiplexor for wscons
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "wskbd*     at ... mux N"
.Cd "wsmouse*   at ... mux N"
.Pp
.Cd "pseudo-device wsmux" Op Ar count
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is a pseudo-device driver that allows several
.Xr wscons 4
input devices to have their events multiplexed into one stream.
.Pp
The typical usage for this device is to have two multiplexors, one
for mouse events and one for keyboard events.
All
.Xr wsmouse 4
devices should direct their events to the mouse mux (normally 0)
and all keyboard devices, except the console, should direct their
events to the keyboard mux (normally 1).
A device will send its events to the mux indicated by the
.Va mux
locator.
If none is given, the device will not use a multiplexor.
The keyboard multiplexor should be connected to the display, using
the
.Xr wsconscfg 8
command.
It will then receive all keystrokes from all keyboards and, furthermore,
keyboards can be dynamically attached and detached without further
user interaction.
In a similar way, the window system will open the mouse multiplexor
and receive all mouse events; mice can also be dynamically attached
and detached.
.Pp
It is also possible to inject events into a multiplexor from a user program.
This is used by the
.Xr wsmoused 8
daemon to take data from a mouse connected to a serial port and
make it appear on the standard mouse mux.
.Ss Ioctls
.Nm
supports
.Xr ioctl 2
commands to configure and manage events that are returned.
The following commands are available:
.Bl -tag -width Dv
.It Dv WSMUXIO_INJECTEVENT Pq Vt "struct wscons_event"
injects a synthetic event to the given device.
Used by
.Xr wsmoused 8 .
This command uses the same
.Vt wscons_event
structure as returned by
.Xr read 2
on
.Xr wscons 4
input devices as input.
.Bd -literal
struct wscons_event {
	u_int		type;
	int		value;
	struct timespec	time;
};
.Ed
.It Dv WSMUXIO_ADD_DEVICE Pq Vt "struct wsmux_device"
adds a device to the mux.
This commands uses a
.Vt wsmux_device
structure as input.
.Bd -literal
struct wsmux_device {
	int type;
#define WSMUX_MOUSE	1
#define WSMUX_KBD	2
#define WSMUX_MUX	3
	int idx;
};
.Ed
.It Dv WSMUXIO_REMOVE_DEVICE Pq Vt "struct wsmux_device"
removes a device from the mux.
.It Dv WSMUXIO_LIST_DEVICES Pq Vt "struct wsmux_device_list"
returns an array of WSMUX_MAXDEV elements describing the devices attached to
the mux.
The array is composed of
.Fa wsmux_device
structures enclosed in a
.Fa wsmux_device_list
structure.
.Bd -literal
struct wsmux_device_list {
	int ndevices;
	struct wsmux_device devices[WSMUX_MAXDEV];
};
.Ed
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -item -compact
.It
.Pa /dev/wsmouse
.It
.Pa /dev/wskbd
.It
.Pa /usr/include/dev/wscons/wsconsio.h
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4 ,
.Xr wskbd 4 ,
.Xr wsmouse 4 ,
.Xr wsconscfg 8 ,
.Xr wsconsctl 8 ,
.Xr wsmoused 8
