.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Hans Petter Selasky <hselasky at freebsd dot org>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 15, 2018
.Dt WSP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wsp
.Nd Wellspring touchpad driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device wsp"
.Cd "device usb"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time,
place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
wsp_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Apple Internal Trackpad
device found in many Apple laptops.
.Pp
The driver simulates a three-button mouse using multi-finger tap
detection.
A single-finger press generates a left button click.
A two-finger tap maps to the right button; whereas a three-finger tap
gets treated as a middle button click.
.Pp
.Nm
supports dynamic reconfiguration using
.Xr sysctl 8
through nodes under
.Nm hw.usb.wsp .
Pointer sensitivity can be controlled using the sysctl tunable
.Nm hw.usb.wsp.scale_factor .
Tap to left-click can be controlled using the sysctl tunable
.Nm hw.usb.wsp.enable_single_tap_clicks ,
set to 0 to disable single tap clicks or 1 to enable them (default).
.Sh FILES
.Nm
creates a blocking pseudo-device file,
.Pa /dev/wsp0 ,
which presents the mouse as a
.Em sysmouse
or
.Em mousesystems
type device--see
.Xr moused 8
for an explanation of these mouse
types.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysmouse 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr xorg.conf 5 Pq Pa ports/x11/xorg ,
.Xr moused 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Huang Wen Hui Aq Mt huanghwh@gmail.com .
