.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2018
.Dt XE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xe
.Nd "Xircom PCMCIA Ethernet device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device xe"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_xe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DEPRECATION NOTICE
The
.Nm
driver is not present in
.Fx 13.0
and later.
See https://github.com/freebsd/fcp/blob/master/fcp-0101.md for more
information.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports
.Tn PCMCIA
Ethernet adapters based on Xircom CE2- and CE3-class hardware.
This includes devices made by Xircom along with
various
.Tn OEM
manufacturers.
.Pp
Please note that the
.Nm
driver only supports
.Tn PCMCIA
cards and their Ethernet functions.
.Nm
does not support the on-board modem device located on some
version of the Ethernet/modem combo cards.
In particular, Xircom RealPort2 cards are not supported by this driver.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm autoselect"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of media type and options.
.It Cm 10Base2/BNC
Select 10Mbps operation on a BNC coaxial connector.
.It Cm 10BaseT/UTP
Select 10Mbps operation on a RJ-45 connector.
.It Cm 100BaseTX
Select 100Mbps operation.
.El
.Pp
Note that 100BaseTX operation is not available on CE2-class cards,
while the 10Base2/BNC mode is only available on CE2-class cards.
Full-duplex
operation is currently not supported.
For more information on configuring network interface devices,
see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Xircom CreditCard Ethernet (PS-CE2-10)
.It
Xircom CreditCard Ethernet + Modem 28 (PS-CEM-28)
.It
Xircom CreditCard Ethernet + Modem 33 (CEM33)
.It
Xircom CreditCard 10/100 (CE3, CE3B)
.It
Xircom CreditCard Ethernet 10/100 + Modem 56 (CEM56)
.It
Xircom RealPort Ethernet 10 (RE10)
.It
Xircom RealPort Ethernet 10/100 (RE100)
.It
Xircom RealPort Ethernet 10/100 + Modem 56 (REM56, REM56G)
.It
Accton Fast EtherCard-16 (EN2226)
.It
Compaq Microcom CPQ550 Ethernet/Modem PC Card
.It
Compaq Netelligent 10/100 PC Card (CPQ-10/100)
.It
Intel EtherExpress Pro/100 PC Card Mobile Adapter 16 (Pro/100 M16A)
.It
Intel EtherExpress Pro/100 LAN/Modem PC Card Adapter (Pro/100 M16B)
.El
.Pp
Other similar devices using the same hardware may also be supported.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "xe%d: Cannot allocate ioport"
.It "xe%d: Cannot allocate irq"
A fatal initialization error occurred while attempting to allocate
system resources for the card.
.It "xe%d: Unable to fix your %s combo card"
A fatal initialization error occurred while attempting to attach an
Ethernet/modem combo card.
.It "xe%d: watchdog timeout: resetting card"
The card failed to generate an interrupt acknowledging a
transmitted packet.
May indicate a
.Tn PCMCIA
configuration problem.
.It "xe%d: no carrier"
The card has lost all contact with the network; this
usually indicates a cable problem.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pccard 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Scott Mitchell Aq Mt rsm@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Scott Mitchell Aq Mt rsm@FreeBSD.org ,
and
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
Supported devices will fail to attach on some machines using the
.Tn NEWCARD
.Tn PC
Card framework.
.Pp
Automatic media selection is usually unreliable.
