.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 23, 2008
.Dt XL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xl
.Nd "3Com Etherlink XL and Fast Etherlink XL Ethernet device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device xl"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_xl_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Ethernet adapters and embedded
controllers based on the 3Com "boomerang," "cyclone," "hurricane"
and "tornado" bus-master Etherlink XL chips.
.Pp
The Etherlink XL chips support built-in 10baseT, 10base2 and 10base5
transceivers as well as an MII bus for externally attached PHY
transceivers.
The 3c905 series typically uses a National Semiconductor
NS 83840A 10/100 PHY for 10/100 Mbps support in full or half-duplex.
The 3c905B adapters have built-in autonegotiation logic mapped onto
the MII for compatibility with previous drivers.
Fast Etherlink XL
adapters such as the 3c905-TX and 3c905B-TX are capable of 10 or
100Mbps data rates in either full or half duplex and can be manually
configured for any supported mode or automatically negotiate the highest
possible mode with a link partner.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
Note that this
option is only available with the 3c905 and 3c905B adapters with
external PHYs or built-in autonegotiation logic.
For 3c900 adapters,
the driver will choose the mode specified in the EEPROM.
The user can
change this by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 10base5/AUI
Enable AUI transceiver (available only on COMBO cards).
.It 10base2/BNC
Enable BNC coax transceiver (available only on COMBO cards).
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
Note that the 100baseTX media type is only available if supported
by the adapter.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following hardware:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3Com 3c900-TPO
.It
3Com 3c900-COMBO
.It
3Com 3c905-TX
.It
3Com 3c905-T4
.It
3Com 3c900B-TPO
.It
3Com 3c900B-TPC
.It
3Com 3c900B-FL
.It
3Com 3c900B-COMBO
.It
3Com 3c905B-T4
.It
3Com 3c905B-TX
.It
3Com 3c905B-FX
.It
3Com 3c905B-COMBO
.It
3Com 3c905C-TX
.It
3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters
.It
3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters
.It
3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters
.It
3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters
.It
3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT, 3CXFE575CT,
3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656, 3CXFEM656B, and
3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters
.It
3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, 3c920B-EMB, and 3c920B-EMB-WNM embedded adapters
.El
.Pp
Both the 3C656 family of CardBus cards and the 3C556 family of MiniPCI
cards have a built-in proprietary modem.
Neither the
.Nm
driver nor any other
.Fx
driver supports this modem.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "xl%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "xl%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "xl%d: device timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.It "xl%d: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.It "xl%d: no memory for tx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the transmitter ring when
allocating a pad buffer or collapsing an mbuf chain into a cluster.
.It "xl%d: command never completed!"
Some commands issued to the 3c90x ASIC take time to complete: the
driver is supposed to wait until the 'command in progress' bit in
the status register clears before continuing.
In rare instances, this
bit may not clear.
To avoid getting caught in an infinite wait loop,
the driver only polls the bit for a finite number of times before
giving up, at which point it issues this message.
This message may
be printed during driver initialization on slower machines.
If you
see this message but the driver continues to function normally, the
message can probably be ignored.
.It "xl%d: chip is in D3 power state -- setting to D0"
This message applies only to 3c905B adapters, which support power
management.
Some operating systems place the 3c905B in low power
mode when shutting down, and some PCI BIOSes fail to bring the chip
out of this state before configuring it.
The 3c905B loses all of
its PCI configuration in the D3 state, so if the BIOS does not set
it back to full power mode in time, it will not be able to configure it
correctly.
The driver tries to detect this condition and bring
the adapter back to the D0 (full power) state, but this may not be
enough to return the driver to a fully operational condition.
If
you see this message at boot time and the driver fails to attach
the device as a network interface, you will have to perform second
warm boot to have the device properly configured.
.Pp
Note that this condition only occurs when warm booting from another
operating system.
If you power down your system prior to booting
.Fx ,
the card should be configured correctly.
.It "xl%d: WARNING: no media options bits set in the media options register!"
This warning may appear when using the driver on some Dell Latitude
docking stations with built-in 3c905-TX adapters.
For whatever the
reason, the 'MII available' bit in the media options register on
this particular equipment is not set, even though it should be (the
3c905-TX always uses an external PHY transceiver).
The driver will
attempt to guess the proper media type based on the PCI device ID
word.
The driver makes a lot of noise about this condition because
the author considers it a manufacturing defect.
.It xl%d: transmission error: %d
.It xl%d: tx underrun, increasing tx start threshold to %d bytes
This message may appear while the adapter tunes its transmission
buffers under various load amounts and are mostly harmless.
It is probably safe to ignore them.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cardbus 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr pccard 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq Mt wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu .
