.\" $OpenBSD: zyd.4,v 1.49 2025/03/25 19:57:54 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\" Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\" This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 25 2025 $
.Dt ZYD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zyd
.Nd ZyDAS ZD1211/ZD1211B USB IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "zyd* at uhub? port ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for wireless network adapters based around
the ZyDAS ZD1211 and ZD1211B USB chips.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA1 and WPA2).
WPA2 is currently the most secure encryption standard for wireless networks
supported by
.Ox .
It is strongly recommended that neither WEP nor WPA1
are used as the sole mechanism to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses.
WPA1 is disabled by default and may be enabled using the option
.Qq Cm wpaprotos Ar wpa1,wpa2 .
For standard WPA networks which use pre-shared keys (PSK),
keys are configured using the
.Qq Cm wpakey
option.
WPA-Enterprise networks require use of the wpa_supplicant package.
The
.Nm
driver relies on the software 802.11 stack for both encryption and decryption
of data frames.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr hostname.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The adapter needs some firmware files, which are loaded on demand by the
driver when a device is attached:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/firmware/zd1211
.It Pa /etc/firmware/zd1211b
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The following devices are known to be supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It 3COM 3CRUSB10075
.It Acer WLAN-G-US1
.It Airlink+ AWLL3025
.It Airlink 101 AWLL3026
.It AOpen 802.11g WL54
.It Asus A9T integrated wireless
.It Asus WL-159g
.It Belkin F5D7050 v.4000
.It Billion BiPAC 3011G
.It Buffalo WLI-U2-KG54L
.It CC&C WL-2203B
.It DrayTek Vigor 550
.It Edimax EW-7317UG
.It Edimax EW-7317LDG
.It Fiberline Networks WL-43OU
.It iNexQ UR055g
.It Linksys WUSBF54G
.It Longshine LCS-8131G3
.It MSI US54SE
.It Philips SNU5600
.It Planet WL-U356
.It Planex GW-US54GD
.It Planex GW-US54GXS
.It Planex GW-US54GZL
.It Planex GW-US54Mini
.It Planex GW-US54ZGL
.It Safecom SWMULZ-5400
.It Sagem XG 760A
.It Sagem XG 76NA
.It Sandberg Wireless G54 USB
.It Sitecom WL-113
.It Sitecom WL-603
.It SMC SMCWUSB-G
.It Sweex wireless USB 54 Mbps
.It Tekram/Siemens USB adapter
.It Telegent TG54USB
.It Trendnet TEW-424UB rev A
.It Trendnet TEW-429UB
.It TwinMOS G240
.It US Robotics 5423
.It X-Micro XWL-11GUZX
.It Yakumo QuickWLAN USB
.It Zonet ZEW2501
.It ZyXEL AG-220
.It ZyXEL AG-225H v2
.It ZyXEL G-200 v2
.It ZyXEL G-202
.It ZyXEL G-220
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example scans for available networks:
.Pp
.Dl # ifconfig zyd0 scan
.Pp
The following
.Xr hostname.if 5
example configures zyd0 to join network
.Dq mynwid ,
using WPA key
.Dq mywpakey ,
obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
join mynwid wpakey mywpakey
inet autoconf
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "zyd0: error N, could not read firmware ..."
For some reason, the driver was unable to read the firmware image from the
filesystem.
The file might be missing or corrupted.
.It "zyd0: could not load firmware (error=N)"
An error occurred while attempting to upload the firmware to the onboard
microcontroller unit.
.It "zyd0: could not send command (error=...)"
An attempt to send a command to the firmware failed.
.It "zyd0: sorry, radio ... is not supported yet"
Support for the specified radio chip is not yet implemented in the driver.
The device will not attach.
.It "zyd0: device version mismatch: 0xXXXX (only >= 43.30 supported)"
Early revisions of the ZD1211 chipset are not supported by this driver.
The device will not attach.
.It "zyd0: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete in time.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Florian Stoehr Aq Mt ich@florian-stoehr.de ,
.An Damien Bergamini Aq Mt damien.bergamini@free.fr ,
and
.An Jonathan Gray Aq Mt jsg@openbsd.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver does not support a lot of the functionality available in the hardware.
More work is required to properly support the IBSS and power management
features.
