.\" $OpenBSD: pthread_attr_setstackaddr.3,v 1.14 2025/06/07 00:16:52 schwarze Exp $
.\" Manual page derived from TOG's UNIX98 documentation.
.\"
.\"  David Leonard, 2000. Public Domain.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 7 2025 $
.Dt PTHREAD_ATTR_SETSTACKADDR 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_attr_setstackaddr ,
.Nm pthread_attr_getstackaddr
.Nd set and get stackaddr attribute
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libpthread
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_setstackaddr "pthread_attr_t *attr" "void *stackaddr"
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_getstackaddr "const pthread_attr_t *attr" "void **stackaddr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The functions
.Fn pthread_attr_setstackaddr
and
.Fn pthread_attr_getstackaddr ,
respectively, set and get the thread
creation
.Va stackaddr
attribute in the
.Fa attr
object.
.Pp
The
.Va stackaddr
attribute specifies the location of storage to be
used for the created thread's stack.
The size of the storage is at least
.Dv PTHREAD_STACK_MIN .
.Pp
On
.Ox
the stack must have been allocated using
.Xr mmap 2
with the
.Va MAP_STACK
attribute.
Otherwise, use of the stack will cause SIGABRT faults.
.Xr pthread_attr_setstack 3
can avoid this problem because it knows the size of the stack to remap.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
.Fn pthread_attr_setstackaddr
and
.Fn pthread_attr_getstackaddr
return a value of 0.
Otherwise, an error number is returned to indicate the error.
.Pp
The
.Fn pthread_attr_getstackaddr
function stores the
.Va stackaddr
attribute value in
.Fa stackaddr
if successful.
.Sh ERRORS
No errors are defined.
.Pp
These functions will not return an error code of
.Bq Er EINTR .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_attr_init 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setdetachstate 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setguardsize 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setstack 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setstacksize 3 ,
.Xr pthread_create 3 ,
.Xr pthreads 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn pthread_attr_setstackaddr
and
.Fn pthread_attr_getstackaddr
conform to ISO/IEC 9945-1 ANSI/IEEE
.Pq Dq Tn POSIX
Std 1003.1 Second Edition 1996-07-12.
