.\" $OpenBSD: pthread_setspecific.3,v 1.14 2025/06/07 00:16:52 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 John Birrell <jb@cimlogic.com.au>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by John Birrell.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN BIRRELL AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: pthread_setspecific.3,v 1.5 1999/08/28 00:03:11 peter Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 7 2025 $
.Dt PTHREAD_SETSPECIFIC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_setspecific
.Nd set a thread-specific data value
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libpthread
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_setspecific "pthread_key_t key" "const void *value"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_setspecific
function associates a thread-specific value with a
.Fa key
obtained via a previous call to
.Fn pthread_key_create .
Different threads may bind different values to the same key.
These values are
typically pointers to blocks of dynamically allocated memory that have been
reserved for use by the calling thread.
.Pp
The effect of calling
.Fn pthread_setspecific
with a key value not obtained from
.Fn pthread_key_create
or after
.Fa key
has been deleted with
.Fn pthread_key_delete
is undefined.
.Pp
.Fn pthread_setspecific
may be called from a thread-specific data destructor function; however, this
may result in lost storage or infinite loops.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_setspecific
function will return zero.
Otherwise an error number will be returned to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn pthread_setspecific
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Insufficient memory exists to associate the value with the
.Fa key .
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The
.Fa key
value is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_getspecific 3 ,
.Xr pthread_key_create 3 ,
.Xr pthread_key_delete 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn pthread_setspecific
conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
