.\" $OpenBSD: pthread_attr_setstacksize.3,v 1.11 2025/06/07 00:16:52 schwarze Exp $
.\" Manual page derived from TOG's UNIX98 documentation.
.\"
.\"  David Leonard, 2000. Public Domain.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 7 2025 $
.Dt PTHREAD_ATTR_SETSTACKSIZE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_attr_setstacksize ,
.Nm pthread_attr_getstacksize
.Nd set and get stacksize attribute
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libpthread
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_setstacksize "pthread_attr_t *attr" "size_t stacksize"
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_getstacksize "const pthread_attr_t *attr" "size_t *stacksize"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The functions
.Fn pthread_attr_setstacksize
and
.Fn pthread_attr_getstacksize ,
respectively, set and get the thread
creation
.Va stacksize
attribute in the
.Fa attr
object.
.Pp
The
.Va stacksize
attribute defines the minimum stack size (in bytes)
allocated for the created thread's stack.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
.Fn pthread_attr_setstacksize
and
.Fn pthread_attr_getstacksize
return a value of 0.
Otherwise, an error number is returned to indicate the error.
.Pp
The
.Fn pthread_attr_getstacksize
function stores the
.Va stacksize
attribute value in
.Fa stacksize
if successful.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_attr_setstacksize
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value of
.Fa stacksize
is less than
.Dv PTHREAD_STACK_MIN
or exceeds a system-imposed limit.
.El
.Pp
These functions will not return an error code of
.Bq Er EINTR .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_attr_init 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setdetachstate 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setguardsize 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setstack 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setstackaddr 3 ,
.Xr pthread_create 3 ,
.Xr pthreads 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn pthread_attr_setstacksize
and
.Fn pthread_attr_getstacksize
conform to ISO/IEC 9945-1 ANSI/IEEE
.Pq Dq Tn POSIX
Std 1003.1 Second Edition 1996-07-12.
