.\" $OpenBSD: pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared.3,v 1.11 2025/06/07 00:16:52 schwarze Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Alex Nash
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared.3,v 1.2 1999/08/28 00:03:11 peter Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 7 2025 $
.Dt PTHREAD_RWLOCKATTR_SETPSHARED 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared
.Nd set the process shared attribute
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libpthread
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared "pthread_rwlockattr_t *attr" "int pshared"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared
function sets the process shared attribute of
.Fa attr
to the value referenced by
.Fa pshared .
.Fa pshared
may be one of two values:
.Bl -hang -offset flag -width 123456789012345678901234
.It Ar PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED
Any thread of any process that has access to the memory where the
read/write lock resides can manipulate the lock.
.It Ar PTHREAD_PROCESS_PRIVATE
Only threads created within the same process as the thread that
initialized the read/write lock can manipulate the lock.
This is the default value.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared
function will return zero.
Otherwise an error number will be returned to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa attr
or
.Fa pshared
is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_rwlock_init 3 ,
.Xr pthread_rwlockattr_init 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared
function is expected to conform to
.St -susv2 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared
function first appeared in
.Fx 3.0
and
.Ox 2.5 .
.Sh BUGS
The PTHREAD_PROCESS_SHARED attribute is not supported.
