.\" $OpenBSD: pthread_rwlockattr_init.3,v 1.11 2025/06/20 12:51:51 job Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Alex Nash
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: pthread_rwlockattr_init.3,v 1.3 1999/08/28 00:03:10 peter Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 20 2025 $
.Dt PTHREAD_RWLOCKATTR_INIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_rwlockattr_init
.Nd initialize a read/write lock attributes object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libpthread
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_init "pthread_rwlockattr_t *attr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_init
function is used to initialize a read/write lock attributes object.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_init
function will return zero.
Otherwise an error number will be returned to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_init
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Insufficient memory exists to initialize the attribute object.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_rwlock_init 3 ,
.Xr pthread_rwlockattr_destroy 3 ,
.Xr pthread_rwlockattr_getpshared 3 ,
.Xr pthread_rwlockattr_setpshared 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_init
function is expected to conform to
.St -susv2 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn pthread_rwlockattr_init
function first appeared in
.Fx 3.0
and
.Ox 2.5 .
