.\" $OpenBSD: pthread_attr_init.3,v 1.12 2025/06/07 00:16:52 schwarze Exp $
.\" Manual page derived from TOG's UNIX98 documentation.
.\"
.\"  David Leonard, 2000. Public Domain.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 7 2025 $
.Dt PTHREAD_ATTR_INIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_attr_init ,
.Nm pthread_attr_destroy
.Nd initialise and destroy threads attribute object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libpthread
.In pthread.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_init "pthread_attr_t *attr"
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_destroy "pthread_attr_t *attr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The function
.Fn pthread_attr_init
initialises a thread attributes
object
.Fa attr
with the default value for all of the individual
attributes used by a given implementation.
.Pp
The resulting attribute object (possibly modified by setting
individual attribute values), when used by
.Xr pthread_create 3 ,
defines the attributes of the thread created.
A single attributes object can be used in multiple simultaneous calls to
.Xr pthread_create 3 .
.Pp
The
.Fn pthread_attr_destroy
function is used to destroy a thread
attributes object.
An implementation may cause
.Fn pthread_attr_destroy
to set
.Fa attr
to an implementation-dependent
invalid value.
The behaviour of using the attribute after it has
been destroyed is undefined.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
.Fn pthread_attr_init
and
.Fn pthread_attr_destroy
return a value of 0.
Otherwise, an error number is returned to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_attr_init
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Insufficient memory exists to initialise the thread attributes
object.
.El
.Pp
These functions will not return an error code of
.Bq Er EINTR .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_attr_setdetachstate 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setguardsize 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setstack 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setstackaddr 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setstacksize 3 ,
.Xr pthread_create 3 ,
.Xr pthreads 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn pthread_attr_destroy
and
.Fn pthread_attr_init
conform to ISO/IEC 9945-1 ANSI/IEEE
.Pq Dq Tn POSIX
Std 1003.1 Second Edition 1996-07-12.
