.\" $OpenBSD: pthread_kill.3,v 1.4 2025/06/07 00:16:52 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000 Jason Evans <jasone@FreeBSD.org>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
.\" BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
.\" OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/lib/libc_r/man/pthread_kill.3,v 1.8 2001/10/01 16:09:09 ru Exp $
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 7 2025 $
.Dt PTHREAD_KILL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_kill
.Nd send a signal to a specified thread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libpthread
.In pthread.h
.In signal.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_kill "pthread_t thread" "int sig"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_kill
function sends a signal, specified by
.Fa sig ,
to a thread, specified by
.Fa thread .
If
.Fa sig
is 0, error checking is performed, but no signal is actually sent.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
.Fn pthread_kill
returns 0.
Otherwise, an error number is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn pthread_kill
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ESRCH
.Fa thread
is an invalid thread ID.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa sig
is an invalid or unsupported signal number.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kill 2 ,
.Xr pthread_self 3 ,
.Xr raise 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn pthread_kill
conforms to
.St -p1003.1-96
