.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2025 $
.Dt FIDO_BIO_INFO_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_bio_info_new ,
.Nm fido_bio_info_free ,
.Nm fido_bio_info_type ,
.Nm fido_bio_info_max_samples
.Nd FIDO2 biometric sensor information API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libfido2 libcbor libcrypto libz
.In fido.h
.In fido/bio.h
.Ft fido_bio_info_t *
.Fn fido_bio_info_new "void"
.Ft void
.Fn fido_bio_info_free "fido_bio_info_t **info_p"
.Ft uint8_t
.Fn fido_bio_info_type "const fido_bio_info_t *info"
.Ft uint8_t
.Fn fido_bio_info_max_samples "const fido_bio_info_t *info"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Biometric sensor metadata is abstracted in
.Em libfido2
by the
.Vt fido_bio_info_t
type.
.Pp
The functions described in this page allow a
.Vt fido_bio_info_t
type to be allocated, deallocated, and inspected.
For device operations on
.Vt fido_bio_info_t ,
please refer to
.Xr fido_bio_dev_get_info 3 .
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_new
function returns a pointer to a newly allocated, empty
.Vt fido_bio_info_t
type.
If memory cannot be allocated, NULL is returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_free
function releases the memory backing
.Fa *info_p ,
where
.Fa *info_p
must have been previously allocated by
.Fn fido_bio_info_new .
On return,
.Fa *info_p
is set to NULL.
Either
.Fa info_p
or
.Fa *info_p
may be NULL, in which case
.Fn fido_bio_info_free
is a NOP.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_type
function returns the fingerprint sensor type, which is
.Dv 1
for touch sensors, and
.Dv 2
for swipe sensors.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_max_samples
function returns the maximum number of successful samples
required for enrollment.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_bio_dev_get_info 3 ,
.Xr fido_bio_enroll_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_bio_template 3
