.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2025 $
.Dt FIDO_DEV_GET_ASSERT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_dev_get_assert
.Nd obtains an assertion from a FIDO2 device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libfido2 libcbor libcrypto libz
.In fido.h
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_get_assert "fido_dev_t *dev" "fido_assert_t *assert" "const char *pin"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fido_dev_get_assert
function asks the FIDO2 device represented by
.Fa dev
for an assertion according to the following parameters defined in
.Fa assert :
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Nm relying party ID ;
.It
.Nm client data hash ;
.It
.Nm list of allowed credential IDs ;
.It
.Nm user presence and user verification attributes .
.El
.Pp
See
.Xr fido_assert_set_authdata 3
for information on how these values are set.
.Pp
If a PIN is not needed to authenticate the request against
.Fa dev ,
then
.Fa pin
may be NULL.
Otherwise
.Fa pin
must point to a NUL-terminated UTF-8 string.
.Pp
After a successful call to
.Fn fido_dev_get_assert ,
the
.Xr fido_assert_count 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_user_display_name 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_user_icon 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_user_name 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_authdata_ptr 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_user_id_ptr 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_sig_ptr 3 ,
and
.Xr fido_assert_sigcount 3
functions may be invoked on
.Fa assert
to retrieve the various attributes of the generated assertion.
.Pp
Please note that
.Fn fido_dev_get_assert
is synchronous and will block if necessary.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The error codes returned by
.Fn fido_dev_get_assert
are defined in
.In fido/err.h .
On success,
.Dv FIDO_OK
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_assert_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_set_authdata 3
