.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2025 $
.Dt FIDO_DEV_ENABLE_ENTATTEST 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_dev_enable_entattest ,
.Nm fido_dev_toggle_always_uv ,
.Nm fido_dev_force_pin_change ,
.Nm fido_dev_set_pin_minlen ,
.Nm fido_dev_set_pin_minlen_rpid
.Nd CTAP 2.1 configuration authenticator API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libfido2 libcbor libcrypto libz
.In fido.h
.In fido/config.h
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_enable_entattest "fido_dev_t *dev" "const char *pin"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_toggle_always_uv "fido_dev_t *dev" "const char *pin"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_force_pin_change "fido_dev_t *dev" "const char *pin"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin_minlen "fido_dev_t *dev" "size_t len" "const char *pin"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin_minlen_rpid "fido_dev_t *dev" "const char * const *rpid" "size_t n" "const char *pin"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The functions described in this page allow configuration of a
CTAP 2.1 authenticator.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_enable_entattest
function enables the
.Em Enterprise Attestation
feature on
.Fa dev .
.Em Enterprise Attestation
instructs the authenticator to include uniquely identifying
information in subsequent attestation statements.
The
.Fa pin
parameter may be NULL if
.Fa dev
does not have a PIN set.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_toggle_always_uv
function toggles the
.Dq user verification always
feature on
.Fa dev .
When set, this toggle enforces user verification at the
authenticator level for all known credentials.
If
.Fa dev
supports U2F (CTAP1) and the user verification methods supported by
the authenticator do not allow protection of U2F credentials, the
U2F subsystem will be disabled by the authenticator.
The
.Fa pin
parameter may be NULL if
.Fa dev
does not have a PIN set.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_force_pin_change
function instructs
.Fa dev
to require a PIN change.
Subsequent PIN authentication attempts against
.Fa dev
will fail until its PIN is changed.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin_minlen
function sets the minimum PIN length of
.Fa dev
to
.Fa len .
Minimum PIN lengths may only be increased.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin_minlen_rpid
function sets the list of relying party identifiers
.Pq RP IDs
that are allowed to obtain the minimum PIN length of
.Fa dev
through the CTAP 2.1
.Dv FIDO_EXT_MINPINLEN
extension.
The list of RP identifiers is denoted by
.Fa rpid ,
a vector of
.Fa n
NUL-terminated UTF-8 strings.
A copy of
.Fa rpid
is made, and no reference to it or its contents is kept.
.Pp
Configuration settings are reflected in the payload returned by the
authenticator in response to a
.Xr fido_dev_get_cbor_info 3
call.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The error codes returned by
.Fn fido_dev_enable_entattest ,
.Fn fido_dev_toggle_always_uv ,
.Fn fido_dev_force_pin_change ,
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin_minlen ,
and
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin_minlen_rpid
are defined in
.In fido/err.h .
On success,
.Dv FIDO_OK
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_cred_pin_minlen 3 ,
.Xr fido_dev_get_cbor_info 3 ,
.Xr fido_dev_reset 3
