.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2025 $
.Dt FIDO_DEV_SET_PIN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_dev_set_pin ,
.Nm fido_dev_get_retry_count ,
.Nm fido_dev_get_uv_retry_count ,
.Nm fido_dev_reset
.Nd FIDO2 device management functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libfido2 libcbor libcrypto libz
.In fido.h
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin "fido_dev_t *dev" "const char *pin" "const char *oldpin"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_get_retry_count "fido_dev_t *dev" "int *retries"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_get_uv_retry_count "fido_dev_t *dev" "int *retries"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_reset "fido_dev_t *dev"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin
function sets the PIN of device
.Fa dev
to
.Fa pin ,
where
.Fa pin
is a NUL-terminated UTF-8 string.
If
.Fa oldpin
is not NULL, the device's PIN is changed from
.Fa oldpin
to
.Fa pin ,
where
.Fa pin
and
.Fa oldpin
are NUL-terminated UTF-8 strings.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_get_retry_count
function fills
.Fa retries
with the number of PIN retries left in
.Fa dev
before lock-out, where
.Fa retries
is an addressable pointer.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_get_uv_retry_count
function fills
.Fa retries
with the number of built-in UV retries left in
.Fa dev
before built-in UV is disabled, where
.Fa retries
is an addressable pointer.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_reset
function performs a reset on
.Fa dev ,
resetting the device's PIN and erasing credentials stored on the
device.
.Pp
Please note that
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin ,
.Fn fido_dev_get_retry_count ,
.Fn fido_dev_get_uv_retry_count ,
and
.Fn fido_dev_reset
are synchronous and will block if necessary.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The error codes returned by
.Fn fido_dev_set_pin ,
.Fn fido_dev_get_retry_count ,
.Fn fido_dev_get_uv_retry_count ,
and
.Fn fido_dev_reset
are defined in
.In fido/err.h .
On success,
.Dv FIDO_OK
is returned.
.Sh CAVEATS
Regarding
.Fn fido_dev_reset ,
the actual user-flow to perform a reset is outside the scope of the
FIDO2 specification, and may therefore vary depending on the
authenticator.
Yubico authenticators will return
.Dv FIDO_ERR_NOT_ALLOWED
if a reset is issued later than 5 seconds after power-up, and
.Dv FIDO_ERR_ACTION_TIMEOUT
if the user fails to confirm the reset by touching the key
within 30 seconds.
