.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2025 $
.Dt FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_bio_enroll_new ,
.Nm fido_bio_enroll_free ,
.Nm fido_bio_enroll_last_status ,
.Nm fido_bio_enroll_remaining_samples
.Nd FIDO2 biometric enrollment API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libfido2 libcbor libcrypto libz
.In fido.h
.In fido/bio.h
.Bd -literal
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_GOOD				0x00
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_HIGH			0x01
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_LOW			0x02
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_LEFT			0x03
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_RIGHT			0x04
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_FAST			0x05
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_SLOW			0x06
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_POOR_QUALITY			0x07
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_SKEWED			0x08
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_TOO_SHORT			0x09
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_MERGE_FAILURE		0x0a
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_EXISTS			0x0b
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_FP_DATABASE_FULL		0x0c
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_NO_USER_ACTIVITY		0x0d
#define FIDO_BIO_ENROLL_NO_USER_PRESENCE_TRANSITION	0x0e
.Ed
.Ft fido_bio_enroll_t *
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_new "void"
.Ft void
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_free "fido_bio_enroll_t **enroll_p"
.Ft uint8_t
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_last_status "const fido_bio_enroll_t *enroll"
.Ft uint8_t
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_remaining_samples "const fido_bio_enroll_t *enroll"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Ongoing FIDO2 biometric enrollments are abstracted in
.Em libfido2
by the
.Vt fido_bio_enroll_t
type.
.Pp
The functions described in this page allow a
.Vt fido_bio_enroll_t
type to be allocated, deallocated, and inspected.
For device operations on
.Vt fido_bio_enroll_t ,
please refer to
.Xr fido_bio_dev_get_info 3 .
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_new
function returns a pointer to a newly allocated, empty
.Vt fido_bio_enroll_t
type.
If memory cannot be allocated, NULL is returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_free
function releases the memory backing
.Fa *enroll_p ,
where
.Fa *enroll_p
must have been previously allocated by
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_new .
On return,
.Fa *enroll_p
is set to NULL.
Either
.Fa enroll_p
or
.Fa *enroll_p
may be NULL, in which case
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_free
is a NOP.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_last_status
function returns the enrollment status of
.Fa enroll .
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_enroll_remaining_samples
function returns the number of samples left for
.Fa enroll
to complete.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_bio_dev_get_info 3 ,
.Xr fido_bio_template 3
