.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2025 $
.Dt FIDO_DEV_MAKE_CRED 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_dev_make_cred
.Nd generates a new credential on a FIDO2 device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libfido2 libcbor libcrypto libz
.In fido.h
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_make_cred "fido_dev_t *dev" "fido_cred_t *cred" "const char *pin"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fido_dev_make_cred
function asks the FIDO2 device represented by
.Fa dev
to generate a new credential according to the following parameters
defined in
.Fa cred :
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Nm type ;
.It
.Nm client data hash ;
.It
.Nm relying party ;
.It
.Nm user attributes ;
.It
.Nm list of excluded credential IDs ;
.It
.Nm resident/discoverable key and user verification attributes .
.El
.Pp
See
.Xr fido_cred_set_authdata 3
for information on how these values are set.
.Pp
If a PIN is not needed to authenticate the request against
.Fa dev ,
then
.Fa pin
may be NULL.
Otherwise
.Fa pin
must point to a NUL-terminated UTF-8 string.
.Pp
After a successful call to
.Fn fido_dev_make_cred ,
the
.Xr fido_cred_authdata_ptr 3 ,
.Xr fido_cred_pubkey_ptr 3 ,
.Xr fido_cred_x5c_ptr 3 ,
and
.Xr fido_cred_sig_ptr 3
functions may be invoked on
.Fa cred
to retrieve the various parts of the generated credential.
.Pp
Please note that
.Fn fido_dev_make_cred
is synchronous and will block if necessary.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The error codes returned by
.Fn fido_dev_make_cred
are defined in
.In fido/err.h .
On success,
.Dv FIDO_OK
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_cred_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_cred_set_authdata 3
