.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 9 2025 $
.Dt FIDO_DEV_GET_TOUCH_BEGIN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_dev_get_touch_begin ,
.Nm fido_dev_get_touch_status
.Nd asynchronously wait for touch on a FIDO2 authenticator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Lb libfido2 libcbor libcrypto libz
.In fido.h
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_begin "fido_dev_t *dev"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_status "fido_dev_t *dev" "int *touched" "int ms"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The functions described in this page allow an application to
asynchronously wait for touch on a FIDO2 authenticator.
This is useful when multiple authenticators are present and
the application needs to know which one to use.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_begin
function initiates a touch request on
.Fa dev .
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_status
function continues an ongoing touch request on
.Fa dev ,
blocking up to
.Fa ms
milliseconds.
On success,
.Fa touched
will be updated to reflect the touch request status.
If
.Fa touched
is 1, the device was touched, and the touch request is
terminated.
If
.Fa touched
is 0, the application may call
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_status
to continue the touch request, or
.Fn fido_dev_cancel
to terminate it.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The error codes returned by
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_begin
and
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_status
are defined in
.In fido/err.h .
On success,
.Dv FIDO_OK
is returned.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Please refer to
.Em examples/select.c
in
.Em libfido2's
source tree.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_dev_cancel 3
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Fn fido_dev_get_touch_status
function will cause a command to be transmitted to U2F
authenticators.
These transmissions should not exceed a frequency of 5Hz.
