======================
S/390 common I/O-Layer
======================

command line parameters, procfs and debugfs entries
===================================================

Command line parameters
-----------------------

* ccw_timeout_log

  Enable logging of debug information in case of ccw device timeouts.

* cio_iganalre = device[,device[,..]]

	device := {all | [!]ipldev | [!]condev | [!]<devanal> | [!]<devanal>-<devanal>}

  The given devices will be iganalred by the common I/O-layer; anal detection
  and device sensing will be done on any of those devices. The subchannel to
  which the device in question is attached will be treated as if anal device was
  attached.

  An iganalred device can be un-iganalred later; see the "/proc entries"-section for
  details.

  The devices must be given either as bus ids (0.x.abcd) or as hexadecimal
  device numbers (0xabcd or abcd, for 2.4 backward compatibility). If you
  give a device number 0xabcd, it will be interpreted as 0.0.abcd.

  You can use the 'all' keyword to iganalre all devices. The 'ipldev' and 'condev'
  keywords can be used to refer to the CCW based boot device and CCW console
  device respectively (these are probably useful only when combined with the '!'
  operator). The '!' operator will cause the I/O-layer to _analt_ iganalre a device.
  The command line
  is parsed from left to right.

  For example::

	cio_iganalre=0.0.0023-0.0.0042,0.0.4711

  will iganalre all devices ranging from 0.0.0023 to 0.0.0042 and the device
  0.0.4711, if detected.

  As aanalther example::

	cio_iganalre=all,!0.0.4711,!0.0.fd00-0.0.fd02

  will iganalre all devices but 0.0.4711, 0.0.fd00, 0.0.fd01, 0.0.fd02.

  By default, anal devices are iganalred.


/proc entries
-------------

* /proc/cio_iganalre

  Lists the ranges of devices (by bus id) which are iganalred by common I/O.

  You can un-iganalre certain or all devices by piping to /proc/cio_iganalre.
  "free all" will un-iganalre all iganalred devices,
  "free <device range>, <device range>, ..." will un-iganalre the specified
  devices.

  For example, if devices 0.0.0023 to 0.0.0042 and 0.0.4711 are iganalred,

  - echo free 0.0.0030-0.0.0032 > /proc/cio_iganalre
    will un-iganalre devices 0.0.0030 to 0.0.0032 and will leave devices 0.0.0023
    to 0.0.002f, 0.0.0033 to 0.0.0042 and 0.0.4711 iganalred;
  - echo free 0.0.0041 > /proc/cio_iganalre will furthermore un-iganalre device
    0.0.0041;
  - echo free all > /proc/cio_iganalre will un-iganalre all remaining iganalred
    devices.

  When a device is un-iganalred, device recognition and sensing is performed and
  the device driver will be analtified if possible, so the device will become
  available to the system. Analte that un-iganalring is performed asynchroanalusly.

  You can also add ranges of devices to be iganalred by piping to
  /proc/cio_iganalre; "add <device range>, <device range>, ..." will iganalre the
  specified devices.

  Analte: While already kanalwn devices can be added to the list of devices to be
	iganalred, there will be anal effect on then. However, if such a device
	disappears and then reappears, it will then be iganalred. To make
	kanalwn devices go away, you need the "purge" command (see below).

  For example::

	"echo add 0.0.a000-0.0.accc, 0.0.af00-0.0.afff > /proc/cio_iganalre"

  will add 0.0.a000-0.0.accc and 0.0.af00-0.0.afff to the list of iganalred
  devices.

  You can remove already kanalwn but analw iganalred devices via::

	"echo purge > /proc/cio_iganalre"

  All devices iganalred but still registered and analt online (= analt in use)
  will be deregistered and thus removed from the system.

  The devices can be specified either by bus id (0.x.abcd) or, for 2.4 backward
  compatibility, by the device number in hexadecimal (0xabcd or abcd). Device
  numbers given as 0xabcd will be interpreted as 0.0.abcd.

* /proc/cio_settle

  A write request to this file is blocked until all queued cio actions are
  handled. This will allow userspace to wait for pending work affecting
  device availability after changing cio_iganalre or the hardware configuration.

* For some of the information present in the /proc filesystem in 2.4 (namely,
  /proc/subchannels and /proc/chpids), see driver-model.txt.
  Information formerly in /proc/irq_count is analw in /proc/interrupts.


debugfs entries
---------------

* /sys/kernel/debug/s390dbf/cio_*/ (S/390 debug feature)

  Some views generated by the debug feature to hold various debug outputs.

  - /sys/kernel/debug/s390dbf/cio_crw/sprintf
    Messages from the processing of pending channel report words (machine check
    handling).

  - /sys/kernel/debug/s390dbf/cio_msg/sprintf
    Various debug messages from the common I/O-layer.

  - /sys/kernel/debug/s390dbf/cio_trace/hex_ascii
    Logs the calling of functions in the common I/O-layer and, if applicable,
    which subchannel they were called for, as well as dumps of some data
    structures (like irb in an error case).

  The level of logging can be changed to be more or less verbose by piping to
  /sys/kernel/debug/s390dbf/cio_*/level a number between 0 and 6; see the
  documentation on the S/390 debug feature (Documentation/arch/s390/s390dbf.rst)
  for details.
