.\"	$OpenBSD: afterboot.8,v 1.175 2025/05/05 20:50:03 tedu Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Marshall M. Midden
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Marshall M. Midden.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 5 2025 $
.Dt AFTERBOOT 8
.\" Originally created by Marshall M. Midden -- 1997-10-20, m4@umn.edu
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm afterboot
.Nd things to check after the first complete boot
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss Starting out
This document attempts to list items for the system administrator
to check and set up after the installation and first complete boot of the
system.
The idea is to create a list of items that can be checked off so that you have
a warm fuzzy feeling that something obvious has not been missed.
A basic knowledge of
.Ux
is assumed, otherwise run:
.Pp
.Dl $ help
.Pp
Complete instructions for correcting and fixing items are not provided.
There are manual pages and other methodologies available for doing that.
For example, to view the man page for the
.Xr ls 1
command, run:
.Pp
.Dl $ man 1 ls
.Pp
Administrators will rapidly become more familiar with
.Ox
by using the high quality manual pages.
.Pp
Some base programs and subsystems also come with sample configuration
files in
.Pa /etc/examples .
.Ss Errata
By the time that you have installed your system, it is possible that
bugs in the release have been found.
Security or reliability fixes can be found at
.Lk https://www.openbsd.org/errata.html .
Binary updates are made available for some architectures and can be installed
using
.Xr syspatch 8 .
.Ss Login
Log in on the console, or over the network using
.Xr ssh 1 .
For security reasons, it is bad practice to log in as root during regular use
and maintenance of the system.
Instead, administrators are encouraged to add a
.Dq regular
user, add said user to the
.Dq wheel
group, then use the
.Xr su 1
and
.Xr doas 1
commands when root privileges are required.
.Pp
The installation process provides an option to set up a user account.
By default, accounts created via this method are automatically added to
the
.Dq wheel
group.
If that option was not used, see the paragraph
.Sx Add new users
below.
.Pp
To deny root logins over the network, edit the
.Pa /etc/ssh/sshd_config
file and set
.Cm PermitRootLogin
to
.Dq no
(see
.Xr sshd_config 5 ) .
.Ss Root password
Change the password for the root user.
(Note that throughout the documentation, the term
.Dq superuser
is a synonym for the root user.)
Choose a password that has digits and special characters
as well as from the upper and lower case alphabet.
Do not choose any word in any language.
It is common for an intruder to use dictionary attacks.
Run the following command to change it:
.Pp
.Dl # passwd root
.Pp
To avoid the possibility of running rogue files placed in
the superuser's
.Ev PATH ,
it should never contain the current directory
.Pq Dq \&. .
.Ss System date
.Xr ntpd 8
is used to automatically synchronize clocks with remote NTP servers.
You can use
.Xr ntpctl 8
to check the status.
To change the NTP server, see
.Xr ntpd.conf 5 .
.Pp
Check the system date with the
.Xr date 1
command.
If needed, change the date, and/or change the symbolic link of
.Pa /etc/localtime
to the correct time zone in the
.Pa /usr/share/zoneinfo
directory.
.Pp
Examples:
.Pp
Set the current date to January 27th, 2016 3:04pm:
.Dl # date 201601271504
.Pp
Set the time zone to Atlantic Standard Time:
.Dl # ln -fs /usr/share/zoneinfo/Canada/Atlantic /etc/localtime
.Ss Check hostname
Use the
.Ic hostname
command to verify that the name of your machine is correct.
See the man page for
.Xr hostname 1
if it needs to be changed.
You will also need to edit the
.Pa /etc/myname
file to have it stick around for the next reboot.
.Ss Verify network interface configuration and routing tables
The first thing to do is an
.Ic ifconfig -a
to see if the network interfaces are properly configured.
Correct by editing
.Pa /etc/hostname. Ns Ar interface
(where
.Ar interface
is the interface name or link layer address, e.g.,
.Dq em0 )
and then using
.Xr ifconfig 8
to manually configure it
if you do not wish to reboot.
Read the
.Xr hostname.if 5
man page for more information on the format of
.Pa /etc/hostname. Ns Ar interface
files and instructions on configuring dynamic addresses.
.Pp
Routing tables are manipulated using
.Xr route 8 .
They can be viewed by issuing
.Dq route -n show .
The default gateway address is stored in the
.Xr mygate 5
file.
If you need to edit this file, a painless way to reconfigure the network
afterwards is
.Ic route flush
followed by a
.Ic sh -x /etc/netstart
command.
Or, you may prefer to manually configure using a series of
.Ic route add
and
.Ic route delete
commands.
.Pp
Packets are not forwarded by default, due to RFC requirements.
If you wish to route packets between interfaces, add one or both
of the following directives (depending on whether IPv4 or IPv6 routing
is required) to
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 :
.Pp
.Dl net.inet.ip.forwarding=1
.Dl net.inet6.ip6.forwarding=1
.Pp
See
.Xr multicast 4
for instructions on configuring multicast routing.
.Ss Check DNS
Use
.Xr host 1
or
.Xr dig 1
to check that domain name resolution is working properly.
.Pp
Most likely, the IP address of at least one domain name server
was added to
.Xr resolv.conf 5
while installing the system.
.Xr resolvd 8
maintains
.Pa /etc/resolv.conf
at runtime.
.Pp
A
.Xr hosts 5
file can be used if there is a need for system specific name
resolution entries.
.Ss Check disk mounts
Check that the disks are mounted correctly by
comparing the
.Pa /etc/fstab
file against the output of the
.Xr mount 8
and
.Xr df 1
commands.
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# cat /etc/fstab
/dev/sd0a / ffs rw 1 1
/dev/sd0d /usr ffs rw,nodev 1 2
/dev/sd0e /var ffs rw,nodev,nosuid 1 3
/dev/sd0g /tmp ffs rw,nodev,nosuid 1 4
/dev/sd0h /home ffs rw,nodev,nosuid 1 5

# mount
/dev/sd0a on / type ffs (local)
/dev/sd0d on /usr type ffs (local, nodev)
/dev/sd0e on /var type ffs (local, nodev, nosuid)
/dev/sd0g on /tmp type ffs (local, nodev, nosuid)
/dev/sd0h on /home type ffs (local, nodev, nosuid)

# df
Filesystem  1024-blocks     Used    Avail Capacity  Mounted on
/dev/sd0a         22311    14589     6606    69%    /
/dev/sd0d        203399   150221    43008    78%    /usr
/dev/sd0e         10447      682     9242     7%    /var
/dev/sd0g         18823        2    17879     0%    /tmp
/dev/sd0h          7519     5255     1888    74%    /home

# pstat -s
Device      512-blocks     Used    Avail Capacity  Priority
/dev/sd0b       131072    84656    46416    65%    0
.Ed
.Pp
Edit
.Pa /etc/fstab
and use the
.Xr mount 8
and
.Xr umount 8
commands as appropriate.
Refer to the above example and
.Xr fstab 5
for information on the format of this file.
.Pp
You may wish to configure NFS partitions now too, or you can do them later.
.Ss Check the running system
You can use
.Xr ps 1 ,
.Xr netstat 1 ,
and
.Xr fstat 1
to check on running processes, network connections, and opened files,
respectively.
.Sh FURTHER CHANGES
The system should be usable now, but you may wish to do more customizing,
such as adding users, etc.
We suggest that you
.Ic cd /etc
and edit any files in that directory as necessary.
.Pp
Note that the
.Pa /etc/motd
file is modified by
.Pa /etc/rc
whenever the system is booted.
To keep any custom message intact, ensure that you leave two blank lines
at the top, or your message will be overwritten.
.Ss Add new users
Add users.
There is an
.Xr adduser 8
script.
You may use
.Xr vipw 8
to add users to the
.Pa /etc/passwd
file
and edit
.Pa /etc/group
by hand to add new groups.
You may also wish to edit
.Pa /etc/login.conf
and tune some of the limits documented in
.Xr login.conf 5 .
The manual page for
.Xr su 1
tells you to make sure to put people in
the
.Sq wheel
group if they need root access.
For example:
.Pp
.Dl wheel:*:0:root,myself
.Ss System command scripts
The
.Pa /etc/rc.*\&
scripts are invoked at boot time, after single-user mode has exited,
and at shutdown.
The whole process is controlled, more or less, by the master script
.Pa /etc/rc .
This script should not be changed by administrators.
.Pp
.Pa /etc/rc
is in turn influenced by the configuration variables present in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf .
Again, this script should not be changed by administrators:
site-specific changes should be made to
.Pq freshly created if necessary
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
or by using the
.Xr rcctl 8
utility.
.Pp
Any commands which should be run before the system sets its
secure level should be made to
.Pa /etc/rc.securelevel ,
and commands to be run after the system sets its
secure level should be made to
.Pa /etc/rc.local .
Commands to be run before system shutdown should be set in
.Pa /etc/rc.shutdown .
.Pp
For more information about system startup/shutdown files, see
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.conf 8 ,
.Xr securelevel 7 ,
and
.Xr rc.shutdown 8 .
.Pp
If you've installed X, you may want to turn on
.Xr xenodm 1 ,
the X Display Manager.
To do this, change the value of
.Va xenodm_flags
in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local .
.Ss Set keyboard type
Some architectures permit keyboard type control.
Use the
.Xr kbd 8
command to change the keyboard encoding.
.Ic kbd -l
will list all available encodings.
.Ic kbd xxx
will select the
.Ic xxx
encoding.
Store the encoding in
.Pa /etc/kbdtype
to make sure it is set automatically at boot time.
.Ss Printers
Edit
.Pa /etc/printcap
and
.Pa /etc/hosts.lpd
to set up any printers.
Consult
.Xr lpd 8
and
.Xr printcap 5
if needed.
.Ss Audio and video recording
The
.Xr audio 4
and
.Xr video 4
drivers by default record only silence and blanked images.
Normal recording can be enabled by adding the following directives to
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kern.audio.record=1
kern.video.record=1
.Ed
.Ss Power management
If the BIOS supports it,
.Xr apmd 8
can be configured to act on different events and adjust device performance.
In the following example it is configured to start on boot in automatic
performance adjustment mode and suspend the system if no AC is connected and
the estimated battery life is equal or below 15%:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# rcctl set apmd status on
# rcctl set apmd flags -A -z 15
.Ed
.Ss Mail aliases
Edit
.Pa /etc/mail/aliases
and set the three standard aliases to go to either a mailing list, or
the system administrator.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Well-known aliases -- these should be filled in!
root:		sysadm
manager:	root
dumper:		root
.Ed
.Ss Mail
The default mail agent on
.Ox
is
.Xr smtpd 8 .
Details on how to configure an alternative mailer are documented in
.Xr mailer.conf 5 .
.Pp
.Ox
ships with a default
.Pa /etc/mail/smtpd.conf
file that will work for simple installations.
See
.Xr smtpd.conf 5
for information on configuring more complex setups.
For the default installation,
.Xr smtpd 8
is configured to only accept connections from the local host.
This makes it possible to send mail locally, but not receive mail from remote
servers, which is ideal if you have one central incoming mail machine and
several clients.
To cause smtpd to accept external network connections, modify the
.Ic listen on
directive in
.Pa /etc/mail/smtpd.conf
to include the interfaces to listen on.
.Ss Daily, weekly, monthly scripts
Review
.Xr daily 8
to understand what the periodic system maintenance scripts do and
how to customize them:
For example, to enable
.Ev ROOTBACKUP
or to add local maintenance code to
.Pa /etc/daily.local , /etc/weekly.local ,
or
.Pa /etc/monthly.local .
.Ss Tighten up security
You might wish to tighten up security more by editing
.Pa /etc/fbtab
as when installing X.
Look at the other files in
.Pa /etc
and edit them as needed.
(Do not edit files ending in
.Pa .db
\(em like
.Pa pwd.db , spwd.db ,
nor
.Pa localtime ,
nor
.Pa rmt ,
nor any directories.)
.Ss Crontab (background running processes)
Check what is running by typing
.Ic crontab -l
as root
and see if anything unexpected is present.
Do you need anything else?
Do you wish to change things?
See
.Xr crontab 5 .
.Ss Next day cleanup
After the first night's
.Xr security 8
run, change ownerships and permissions
on files, directories, and devices; root may have received mail
with subject: "<hostname> daily insecurity output".
This mail contains a set of security recommendations,
presented as a list looking something like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
var/mail:
        permissions (0755, 0775)
etc/daily:
        user (0, 3)
.Ed
.Pp
The best bet is to follow the advice in that list.
The recommended setting is the first item in parentheses, while
the current setting is the second one.
This list is generated by
.Xr mtree 8
using
.Pa /etc/mtree/special .
Use
.Xr chmod 1 ,
.Xr chgrp 1 ,
and
.Xr chown 8
as needed.
.Ss Daemons
Enable/disable any daemon processes as necessary.
.Xr intro 8
contains a comprehensive guide to the various daemons available on the
.Ox
system.
.Ss Packages
Install your own packages.
The
.Ox
ports collection includes a large set of third-party software.
Most of it is available as binary packages that you can install using
.Xr pkg_add 1 .
See
.Xr packages 7
for more details.
To start daemons installed from packages, see
.Xr rc.d 8 .
.Pp
There is also other third-party software that is available
in source form only, either because it has not been ported to
.Ox
yet, or because licensing restrictions make binary redistribution
impossible.
Sometimes checking the mailing lists for
past problems that people have encountered will result in a fix posted.
.Ss Compiling a kernel
Information on building and modifying kernels
is contained within
.Xr config 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr doas 1 ,
.Xr ksh 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr pkg_add 1 ,
.Xr ps 1 ,
.Xr vi 1 ,
.Xr multicast 4 ,
.Xr hier 7 ,
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr dmesg 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr intro 8 ,
.Xr rcctl 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
This document first appeared in
.Ox 2.2 .
