.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause-FreeBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Mateusz Piotrowski <0mp@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd August 20, 2018
.Dt BEINSTALL.SH 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm beinstall.sh
.Nd "install a boot environment using the current FreeBSD source tree"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar options Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
installs a boot environment using the current
.Fx
source tree.
.Nm
also automatically performs
.Pa /etc
updates
(using either
.Xr etcupdate 8
or
.Xr mergemaster 8 )
and
package updates using
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8
automatically in the new boot environment sandbox.
.Pp
Upon successful completion, the system will be ready to boot into the new boot
environment.
Upon failure, the target boot environment will be destroyed.
In all cases, the running system is left untouched
and a reboot into a partially updated system
(due to install or hardware failure) cannot happen.
Additionally, the full installation process requires
only one reboot as it is performed
in a new boot environment.
.Pp
.Nm
requires a fully built world and kernel.
It also requires
.Xr beadm 1
and
.Xr pkg 8 ,
which are not present in the base system and have to be installed manually.
.Pp
The
.Ar options
provided to
.Nm
are world and kernel flags like
.Ev KERNCONF
as described in
.Xr build 7 .
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
User modifiable variables.
Set these in the environment if desired:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ev CONFIG_UPDATER Pq default: Dq Li "etcupdate"
Config updater:
.Xr etcupdate 8
and
.Xr mergemaster 8
are supported.
Set to an empty string to skip.
.It Ev ETCUPDATE_FLAGS Pq default: Dq Li "-F"
Flags for
.Xr etcupdate 8
if used.
.It Ev MERGEMASTER_FLAGS Pq default: Dq Li "-iFU"
Flags for
.Xr mergemaster 8
if used.
.It Ev NO_PKG_UPGRADE Pq default: Dq Li ""
If not empty,
.Dq Li pkg upgrade
will be skipped.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Sy src/ Ns Pa tools/build/beinstall.sh
Place where
.Nm
lives in the src tree.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr beadm 1 ,
.Xr build 7 ,
.Xr development 7 ,
.Xr etcupdate 8 ,
.Xr mergemaster 8 ,
.Xr pkg 8
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
is inspired by and similar in function to
Solaris/illumos-style upgrades.
.Pp
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
script was implemented by
.An Will Andrews Aq Mt will@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Mateusz Piotrowski Aq Mt 0mp@FreeBSD.org .
