.\"	$OpenBSD: boot_config.8,v 1.34 2025/05/05 20:50:03 tedu Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Mats O Jansson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 5 2025 $
.Dt BOOT_CONFIG 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm boot_config
.Nd how to change kernel configuration at boot
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm BOOT_CONFIG
is a kernel option that makes it possible to change the configuration
at boot time.
The same interface is available from userland, using the
.Fl e
argument to
.Xr config 8 .
.Pp
The boot time configuration is invoked by passing the
.Fl c
option, either from the firmware prompt or,
depending on the architecture, when the bootstrap loader
prompts for a kernel to boot:
.Bd -literal
>> OpenBSD/i386 BOOT 3.26
.No "boot>" Ic boot -c
booting hd0a:/bsd: ...
\&...
real mem  = 1073086464 (1023MB)
avail mem = 1043189760 (994MB)
User Kernel Config
UKC>
.Ed
.Pp
Changes made can be saved for the next reboot, by using
.Xr config 8 .
However, those changes would not persist across system upgrades and would
prevent kernel relinking.
To ensure these changes are carried over to upgraded kernels, they can
be saved to the
.Xr bsd.re-config 5
configuration file.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "disable devno | dev"
.It Ic add Ar dev
Add a device through copying another.
.It Ic base Cm 8 | 10 | 16
Change the base of numbers displayed and entered.
.It Ic change Ar devno | dev
Modify one or more devices.
.It Ic disable Ar devno | dev
Disable one or more devices.
.It Ic enable Ar devno | dev
Enable one or more devices.
.It Ic exit
Continue boot.
.It Ic find Ar devno | dev
Find one or more devices.
.It Ic help
Give a short summary of all commands and their arguments.
.It Ic list
Show all known devices, a screen at a time.
.It Ic lines Op Ar count
Set the number of rows per page.
.It Ic quit
Continue boot.
.It Ic show Op Ar attr Op Ar val
Show all devices for which attribute
.Ar attr
has the value
.Ar val .
.It Ic verbose
Toggle the autoconfig verbose variable.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The Ethernet card is not detected at boot because the kernel configuration
does not match the physical hardware configuration,
e.g. wrong IRQ in OpenBSD/i386.
The Ethernet card is supposed to use the
.Xr ne 4
driver.
.Bd -literal
.No UKC> Ic find ne
24 ne0 at isa0 port 0x240 size 0 iomem 0xd8000 iosiz 0 irq 9 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
25 ne1 at isa0 port 0x300 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq 10 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
26 ne* at isapnp0 port -1 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq -1 drq -1 flags 0x0
27 ne* at pci* dev -1 function -1 flags 0x0
28 ne* at pcmcia* function -1 irq -1 flags 0x0
UKC>
.Ed
.Pp
ne1 seems to match the configuration except it uses IRQ 5 instead of IRQ 10.
So the irq on ne1 should be changed via the
.Fa change
command.
The device can be specified by either name or number.
.Bd -literal
.No UKC> Ic change ne1
25 ne1 at isa0 port 0x300 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq 10 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
.No change (y/n) \&? Ic y
.No port [0x300] \&?
.No size [0] \&?
.No iomem [-1] \&?
.No iosiz [0] \&?
.No irq [10] \&? Ic 5
.No drq [-1] \&?
.No drq2 [-1] \&?
.No flags [0] \&?
25 ne1 changed
25 ne1 at isa0 port 0x300 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq 5 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
UKC>
.Ed
.Pp
The show command is useful for finding which devices have a certain attribute.
It can also be used to find those devices with a particular value for
an attribute.
.Bd -literal
.No UKC> Ic show slot
  2 ahc* at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
 10 uha* at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
 12 ep0 at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
 17 ep* at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
102 ahb* at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
103 fea* at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
.No UKC> Ic show port 0x300
 25 ne1 at isa0 port 0x300 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq 10 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
 72 we1 at isa0 port 0x300 size 0 iomem 0xcc000 iosiz 0 irq 10 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
 75 el0 at isa0 port 0x300 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq 9 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
 77 ie1 at isa0 port 0x300 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq 10 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
UKC>
.Ed
.Pp
It is possible to add new devices, but only devices that were linked into the
kernel.
If a new device is added, following devices will be renumbered.
.Bd -literal
.No UKC> Ic find ep
 11 ep0 at isa0 port -1 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq -1 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
 12 ep0 at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
 13 ep0 at pci* dev -1 function -1 flags 0x0
 14 ep* at isapnp0 port -1 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq -1 drq -1 flags 0x0
 15 ep* at isa0 port -1 size 0 iomem -1 iosiz 0 irq -1 drq -1 drq2 -1 flags 0x0
 16 ep* at eisa0 slot -1 flags 0x0
 17 ep* at pci* dev -1 function -1 flags 0x0
 18 ep* at pcmcia* dev -1 irq -1 flags 0x0
.No UKC> Ic add ep1
.No "Clone Device (DevNo, 'q' or '\&?') \&?" Ic 13
.No "Insert before Device (DevNo, 'q' or '\&?')" Ic 14
 14 ep1 at pci* dev -1 function -1
.No UKC> Ic change 14
 14 ep1 at pci* dev -1 function -1
.No change (y/n) \&? Ic y
.No dev [-1] \&? Ic 14
.No function [-1] \&?
.No flags [0] \&? Ic 18
 14 ep1 changed
 14 ep1 at pci* dev 14 function -1 flags 0x12
UKC>
.Ed
.Pp
When configuration is completed, booting can proceed by issuing the
.Ic quit
or
.Ic exit
commands.
.Bd -literal
.No UKC> Ic quit
Continuing...
mainbus0 (root)
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bsd.re-config 5 ,
.Xr config 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Mats O Jansson Aq Mt moj@stacken.kth.se
