.\"	$OpenBSD: intro.8,v 1.29 2019/05/26 00:52:22 naddy Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: intro.8,v 1.3 1994/11/30 19:36:24 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)intro.8	8.2 (Berkeley) 12/11/93
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 26 2019 $
.Dt INTRO 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm intro
.Nd introduction to system maintenance and operation commands
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The manual pages in section 8 contain information related to
system operation and maintenance.
They describe commands concerning file systems,
such as
.Xr edquota 8 ,
.Xr fsck 8 ,
.Xr mount 8 ,
and
.Xr newfs 8 .
They also cover commands concerning system backup/recovery, such as
.Xr dump 8
and
.Xr restore 8 .
.Pp
There are pages which document the running of the system, such as
.Xr afterboot 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr security 8 ,
and the configuration files located in
.Pa /etc .
Procedures concerning system failure are documented in
.Xr crash 8 .
.Pp
Section 8 pages also describe network services and daemons.
The rest of this page discusses some of the main daemons
available on the
.Ox
system,
and how to enable/disable them.
.Pp
System daemons are controlled by the script
.Xr rc 8 ,
which is in turn configured by
.Xr rc.conf 8 .
For example the HTTP daemon
.Xr httpd 8
is controlled by the following line from
.Xr rc.conf 8 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
httpd_flags=NO
.Ed
.Pp
Thus it is not started by default.
To enable or disable daemon processes,
administrators should edit the file
.Xr rc.conf.local 8
or use the
.Xr rcctl 8
utility.
The
.Xr rc.conf.local 8
file overrides variable assignments in
.Xr rc.conf 8 .
So to enable
.Xr httpd 8 ,
the following line might be added to
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
httpd_flags="-v"
.Ed
.Pp
As can be seen above,
this method is also used to specify additional options.
.Pp
Below is a list of some of the daemons available.
For further information, see
.Xr rc 8
and the individual pages for the utilities.
.Ss Automounter daemon (amd)
If using the
.Xr amd 8
daemon,
go into the
.Pa /etc/amd
directory and set it up by
renaming
.Pa master.sample
to
.Pa master
and editing it and creating other maps as needed.
Alternatively, you can get your maps with YP.
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va amd_flags
and
.Va amd_master .
.Ss DNS server
If you are using a name server, check the
.Pa /etc/resolv.conf
file.
It may look something like:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
domain nts.umn.edu
nameserver 128.101.101.101
nameserver 134.84.84.84
search nts.umn.edu. umn.edu.
lookup file bind
.Ed
.Pp
If using a caching name server, add the line "nameserver 127.0.0.1" first.
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va nsd_flags
and
.Va unbound_flags .
.Ss Clock synchronisation
In order to make sure the system clock is correct,
it may be synchronised with a number of external sources.
The utilities available are:
.Xr ntpd 8
and
.Xr rdate 8 .
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va ntpd_flags .
.Ss BOOTP/DHCP server
If this is a
BOOTP or DHCP
server, edit
.Pa /etc/dhcpd.conf
as needed.
See also
.Xr diskless 8 .
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va bootparamd_flags ,
.Va dhcpd_flags ,
and
.Va dhcrelay_flags .
.Ss HP remote boot server
Edit
.Pa /etc/rbootd.conf
if needed for remote booting.
If you do not have HP computers doing remote booting, do not enable this.
See also
.Xr diskless 8 .
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va rbootd_flags .
.Ss httpd web server (HTTP)
On
.Ox
it will
.Xr chroot 2
to
.Pa /var/www .
Detailed information is available in
.Xr httpd 8
and
.Xr httpd.conf 5 .
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va httpd_flags .
.Ss NFS server
If this is an NFS server,
edit
.Pa /etc/exports .
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va mountd_flags
and
.Va nfsd_flags .
.Ss Relay Daemon
A relay daemon,
.Xr relayd 8 ,
able to run as a
load-balancer, application layer gateway, or transparent proxy.
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va relayd_flags .
.Ss Routing Daemons
Various daemons for managing routing tables are available:
.Xr bgpd 8 ,
.Xr eigrpd 8 ,
.Xr ospfd 8 ,
and
.Xr ripd 8 .
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va bgpd_flags ,
.Va eigrpd_flags ,
.Va ospfd_flags ,
and
.Va ripd_flags .
.Ss RPC-based network services
Several services depend on the RPC portmapper,
.Xr portmap 8 ,
being running for proper operation.
This includes YP and NFS exports, among other services.
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va portmap_flags .
.Ss YP setup
Check the YP domain name with the
.Xr domainname 1
command.
If necessary, correct it by editing the
.Pa /etc/defaultdomain
file (see
.Xr defaultdomain 5 ) .
The
.Pa /etc/netstart
script reads this file on boot to determine and set the domain name.
You may also set the running system's domain name with the
.Xr domainname 1
command.
.Pp
Relevant
.Xr rc.conf 8
variables:
.Va ypbind_flags .
.Pp
After starting YP client services, perform the remaining YP activation
as described in
.Xr passwd 5
and
.Xr group 5 .
.Pp
In particular, to enable YP passwd support, you'll need to add the following
line to
.Pa /etc/master.passwd :
.Pp
.Dl +:*::::::::
.Pp
You do this by using
.Xr vipw 8 .
.Pp
There are many more YP man pages available to help you.
You can find more information by starting with
.Xr yp 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr afterboot 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.conf 8 ,
.Xr rcctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
An
.Nm intro
manual for section 8 appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
