.\"	$OpenBSD: netstart.8,v 1.31 2022/10/25 17:10:13 kn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, Miodrag Vallat.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)rc.8	8.2 (Berkeley) 12/11/93
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: October 25 2022 $
.Dt NETSTART 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm netstart
.Nd network startup script
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cm sh Pa /etc/netstart
.Op Fl n
.Op Ar interface ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a
.Xr sh 1
script invoked by
.Xr rc 8
during an automatic reboot and after single-user mode is exited;
it performs network initialization.
.Pp
.Nm
can also be used to start newly created interfaces.
Its behaviour is controlled to some extent by variables defined in
.Xr rc.conf 8 .
.Pp
During the system boot,
.Nm
is executed.
.Nm
performs the following operations, in the sequence given:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
Configure the loopback interface.
.It
Configure all physical interfaces.
.It
Configure non-physical interfaces that can provide the default gateway,
such as
.Xr aggr 4 ,
.Xr trunk 4 ,
.Xr svlan 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr carp 4 ,
and
.Xr pppoe 4 .
.It
Initialize the routing table and set up the default routes.
.It
Configure tunnel interfaces that require a working network
to reach the other end of the tunnel,
such as
.Xr tun 4 ,
.Xr tap 4 ,
.Xr gif 4 ,
.Xr etherip 4 ,
.Xr gre 4 ,
.Xr egre 4 ,
.Xr pflow 4 ,
and
.Xr wg 4 .
.El
.Pp
After the system is completely initialized, it is possible to start
newly created interfaces or apply configuration from
.Xr hostname.if 5
files to an existing interfaces.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl n
Reports the steps that would be taken,
without actually configuring anything.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr multicast 4 ,
.Xr defaultdomain 5 ,
.Xr hostname.if 5 ,
.Xr mygate 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.conf 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
command first appeared in
.Bx 4.0 .
