.\"	$OpenBSD: rc.conf.8,v 1.31 2022/09/25 22:47:27 kn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Ian F. Darwin
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Ingo Schwarze <schwarze@openbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS
.\" OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 25 2022 $
.Dt RC.CONF 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc.conf ,
.Nm rc.conf.local
.Nd system daemon configuration database
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Nm rc.conf
contains a series of variable assignments that are used to configure
the system daemons.
These variables are read by
.Xr rc 8
early on in the boot sequence and every time an
.Xr rc.d 8
script is executed.
.Pp
It is advisable to leave
.Nm rc.conf
untouched, and instead create and edit a new
.Nm rc.conf.local
file or use the
.Xr rcctl 8
utility.
Since only the last assignment to any variable takes effect,
variables set in this file override variables previously set in
.Nm rc.conf .
.Pp
.Nm rc.conf
is made up of variable assignments
.Pq Ar variable Ns = Ns Ar value
with comments designated by a hash mark
.Pq Sq # .
.Pp
.Sy Base system daemon
configuration variables are used to enable and disable daemon programs
that are installed by default, and to set their command line options.
.Pp
All of these variables follow the format
.Dq Ar daemon Ns _flags
where
.Ar daemon
is the name of one of the
.Xr rc.d 8
daemon control scripts.
The list of base system daemons, including the information whether
they are enabled by default, can be displayed with this command:
.Pp
.Dl grep _flags /etc/rc.conf
.Pp
If one of these variables is set to
.Cm NO ,
the respective
.Ar daemon
is disabled.
If set to the empty string, the
.Ar daemon
is run with the default command line arguments defined in its
.Xr rc.d 8
.Ar daemon
script, or without command line arguments if no such default exists.
If set to any other value, including a string containing
only a single blank character, the
.Ar daemon
is run with those command line arguments.
.Pp
.Sy Package daemon
configuration variables are used to enable and disable
daemon programs installed from
.Xr packages 7 ,
and to set their command line options.
.Pp
The special
.Cm pkg_scripts
variable lists
.Xr rc.d 8
.Ar daemon
control scripts to be started in the specified order.
For each
.Ar daemon
listed, its default command line options can optionally be overridden
using the variable
.Ar daemon Ns _flags
as described above.
.Pp
.Sy Base system service
configuration variables control features available by default
that are not implemented as daemons.
They can be set to either
.Cm YES
or
.Cm NO .
When set to
.Cm YES ,
they have the following effects:
.Bl -tag -width check_quotas
.It Cm accounting
rc calls:
.Xr accton 8
.Pa /var/account/acct
.It Cm check_quotas
rc calls:
.Xr quotacheck 8
.Fl a ;
.Xr quotaon 8
.Fl a
.It Cm ipsec
rc calls:
.Xr ipsecctl 8
.Fl f Pa /etc/ipsec.conf
.It Cm library_aslr
rc reorders some libraries for improved protection against ROP.
.It Cm multicast
See
.Xr multicast 4 .
.It Cm pf
rc calls:
.Xr pfctl 8
.Fl ef Pa /etc/pf.conf
.It Cm spamd_black
The script
.Pa /etc/rc.d/spamd
uses
.Fl b
in front of any other configured command line arguments when running
.Xr spamd 8
and
.Xr spamd-setup 8 .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Auxiliary
configuration variables mostly determine
the locations of specific configuration files.
The boot scripts use them as follows:
.Bl -tag -width amd_master
.It Cm amd_master
The
.Xr amd 8
master map file.
The script
.Pa /etc/rc.d/amd
appends its content to the command line when starting the auto mounter daemon.
.It Cm shlib_dirs
Extra shared library search path entries.
rc calls:
.Xr ldconfig 8
.Pa /usr/X11R6/lib
.Pa /usr/local/lib
.Pf $ Brq Ar shlib_dirs
.It Cm savecore_flags
rc calls:
.Xr savecore 8
.Pf $ Brq Ar savecore_flags
.Pa /var/crash
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Do not start the
.Xr dhcpd 8
daemon when booting the system:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dhcpd_flags=NO
.Ed
.Pp
To run the dhcpd daemon,
add the following line to
.Nm rc.conf.local :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dhcpd_flags=
.Ed
.Pp
To start it with some options:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dhcpd_flags=-A abandoned
.Ed
.Pp
Run
.Pa /etc/rc.d/messagebus
then
.Pa /etc/rc.d/cupsd
with the
.Cm start
argument at boot time,
and in reverse order with the
.Cm stop
argument at shutdown:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_scripts=messagebus cupsd
.Ed
.Pp
The default location of the
.Xr amd 8
master map file is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
amd_master=/etc/amd/master	# AMD 'master' map
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr intro 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.d 8 ,
.Xr rcctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file first appeared in
.Ox 2.2 .
