.\"	$OpenBSD: rc.d.8,v 1.42 2025/08/15 11:35:18 ajacoutot Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Antoine Jacoutot
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Robert Nagy, Antoine Jacoutot, Ingo Schwarze
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 15 2025 $
.Dt RC.D 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc.d
.Nd daemon control scripts
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/rc.d/ Ns Ar daemon
.Op Fl d | q
.Op Fl f
.Ar action
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Pa /etc/rc.d
directory contains
.Xr ksh 1
scripts to start, stop, and reconfigure daemon
programs
.Pq Dq services .
.Pp
Services installed from
.Xr packages 7
may be started at boot time in the order specified by the
.Va pkg_scripts
variable from
.Xr rc.conf 8 ;
the order will be reversed during shutdown.
Services comprising
.Ox
base are started by
.Xr rc 8 .
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d
Setting this option will print the function names as they are called
and prevent the
.Xr rc.subr 8
framework from redirecting stdout and stderr to /dev/null.
This is used to allow debugging of failed
.Ar actions .
.It Fl f
This option only affects the
.Cm start
action.
It will forcibly start the daemon whatever value
.Va daemon_flags
is set to.
If
.Va daemon_flags
is set to
.Dq NO ,
execution will continue with the script's own defaults unless other
flags are specified.
.It Fl q
Quiet mode.
Only display the script name and the result of the
.Ar action
on error.
.El
.Pp
Each such script responds to the following
.Ar actions :
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width configtest -offset indent -compact
.It Cm start
Start the service, if not already running.
.It Cm stop
Stop the service.
.It Cm reload
Tell the daemon to reload its configuration.
.It Cm restart
Perform a stop, then a start.
.It Cm check
Return 0 if the daemon is running or 1 if it is not.
.It Cm configtest
Check that the daemon configuration is valid.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Daemon control scripts use a fixed number of
.Xr ksh 1
variables when starting a daemon.
The following can be overridden by site-specific values provided in
.Xr rc.conf.local 8 :
.Bl -tag -width daemon_timeout -offset indent
.It Ar daemon Ns _execdir
Run daemon from the specified directory.
.It Ar daemon Ns _flags
Additional arguments to call the daemon with.
These will be appended to any mandatory arguments already contained in the
.Va daemon
variable defined in the control script.
If
.Ar daemon Ns _flags
is set to
.Dq NO ,
it will prevent the daemon from starting even when listed in
.Va pkg_scripts .
.It Ar daemon Ns _logger
Redirect standard output and error to
.Xr logger 1
using the configured priority (e.g. "daemon.info").
.It Ar daemon Ns _rtable
Routing table to run the daemon under, using
.Xr route 8 .
.It Ar daemon Ns _timeout
Maximum time in seconds to wait for the
.Cm start ,
.Cm stop
and
.Cm reload
actions to return.
This is only guaranteed with the default
.Ic rc_start ,
.Ic rc_stop
and
.Ic rc_reload
functions.
.It Ar daemon Ns _user
User to run the daemon as, using
.Xr su 1 .
.El
.Pp
To obtain the actual variable names, replace
.Ar daemon
with the name of the script.
For example, postgres is managed through
.Pa /etc/rc.d/postgresql :
.Pp
.Dl daemon_flags=-D /var/postgresql/data -w -l /var/postgresql/logfile
.Pp
To override this and increase the debug log level (keeping the existing
flags), define the following in
.Xr rc.conf.local 8 :
.Pp
.Dl postgresql_flags=-D /var/postgresql/data -w -l /var/postgresql/logfile -d 5
.Pp
Each script may define its own defaults, as explained in
.Xr rc.subr 8 .
.Pp
.Va daemon_class
is a special read-only variable.
It is set to
.Dq daemon
unless there is a login class configured in
.Xr login.conf 5
with the same name as the
.Nm rc.d
script itself,
in which case it will be set to that login class.
This allows setting many initial process properties, for example
environment variables, scheduling priority, and process limits
such as maximum memory use and number of files.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/rc.d/
Directory containing daemon control scripts.
.It Pa /etc/rc.d/rc.subr
Functions and variables used by
.Nm rc.d
scripts.
.It Pa /var/run/rc.d/
Directory containing files recording the variables of currently running daemons.
Some are informational and some are for matching daemons using
.Xr pgrep 1
and
.Xr pkill 1 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ksh 1 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.conf 8 ,
.Xr rc.subr 8 ,
.Xr rcctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Pa /etc/rc.d
directory
first appeared in
.Ox 4.9 .
