.\"	$OpenBSD: rc.shutdown.8,v 1.17 2024/09/15 19:39:26 kn Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Aaron Campbell
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 15 2024 $
.Dt RC.SHUTDOWN 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc.shutdown
.Nd command script run at system shutdown
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When the system is shut down using the
.Xr reboot 8
or
.Xr halt 8
commands,
or when
.Xr init 8
is signalled to do so,
or when a keyboard-requested halt is issued (if the architecture supports it),
.Xr rc 8
is invoked with the argument
.Dq shutdown .
This document details the actions taken by
.Xr rc 8
in such an instance.
.Pp
Firstly it saves random data for reseeding the kernel random number
generator during the next boot.
It then stops any daemons
defined in the
.Va pkg_scripts
variable in
.Xr rc.conf.local 8 ,
as well as
.Xr vmd 8 ,
in that order,
by passing them the
.Cm stop
argument.
.Pp
.Xr rc 8
then runs
.Nm .
The administrator should place in this file
any commands they wish to have executed during shutdown.
.Pp
Finally, all
.Xr carp 4
interfaces are brought down and then the system shuts down.
.Pp
If
.Xr init 8
is exiting single-user mode it will also run the first part of shutdown
(saving random data),
though not the latter.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/rc.shutdown"
.It Pa /etc/rc.shutdown
Command script run at system shutdown.
.It Pa /etc/examples/rc.shutdown
Example script.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.conf 8 ,
.Xr reboot 8
