.\"	$OpenBSD: release.8,v 1.100 2025/08/19 15:51:51 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\"	Copyright (c) 2000 Marco S. Hyman
.\"	Copyright (c) 2016 Theo Buehler <tb@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\"	Permission to copy all or part of this material for any purpose is
.\"	granted provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
.\"	are duplicated in all copies.  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS''
.\"	AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT
.\"	LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\"	FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 19 2025 $
.Dt RELEASE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm release
.Nd building an OpenBSD release
.Sh DESCRIPTION
There are several steps necessary to build a release:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -compact -offset indent
.It
Update sources.
.It
Build and install a new kernel.
.It
Build a new base system.
.It
Make and validate the base system release.
.It
Build and install Xenocara.
.It
Make and validate the Xenocara release.
.It
Create boot and installation disk images.
.It
Make the third party packages.
.El
.Pp
This manual describes the steps for the
.Em release
and
.Em stable
branches.
To build a
.Em current
release, additional steps may be required.
See
.Lk https://www.openbsd.org/faq/current.html
for any needed workarounds.
.Pp
Commands to be run as a user are preceded by a dollar sign
.Sq $ .
Commands that must be run as the superuser are preceded by a hash mark
.Sq # .
Privileges will be de-escalated to the user
.Sy build
whenever possible.
.Pp
Most of the defaults can be overridden by setting
the appropriate variables in
.Xr mk.conf 5 .
.Ss 1. Update sources
A
.Nm
should use sources that were checked out using the same
.Xr cvs 1
tag.
There are two families of tags:
.Bl -tag -width OPENBSD_x_y_BASE
.It OPENBSD_x_y_BASE
The sources for the
.Ox x.y
release.
.It OPENBSD_x_y
The sources for the
.Ox x.y
stable branch.
It contains the patches described in
.Lk https://www.openbsd.org/stable.html .
.El
.Pp
See
.Lk https://www.openbsd.org/anoncvs.html
for instructions on fetching the sources for the first time.
.Pp
To update existing sources to the versions identified by one of the above
tags, use the commands:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ cd /usr/src && cvs up -r TAG -Pd
$ cd /usr/xenocara && cvs up -r TAG -Pd
$ cd /usr/ports && cvs up -r TAG -Pd
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Warning :
.Xr cvs 1
tags are
.Sq sticky .
See
.Xr cvs 1
for more information.
.Ss 2. Build and install a new kernel
Always build and install a new kernel and reboot before
building the programs that will use the kernel.
This ensures that any new system calls, for example, will be present
when needed.
.Pp
.Dl # cd /sys/arch/$(machine)/compile/GENERIC.MP
.Pp
Replace
.Pa GENERIC.MP
with a different kernel configuration if necessary.
.Pp
Create the build directory and configuration file,
then compile and install the kernel:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# make obj
# make config
# make && make install
.Ed
.Pp
The current kernel is copied to
.Pa /obsd
and the new kernel to
.Pa /bsd .
Reboot.
.Ss 3. Build a new base system
The build process will place the object files in a tree under
.Pa /usr/obj .
This directory must be owned by build:wobj with mode 770.
.Pp
Create the tree of obj directories and begin the build:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# cd /usr/src
# make obj && make build
.Ed
.Pp
After the build is completed, update
.Pa /etc ,
.Pa /var ,
and
.Pa /dev ,
using
.Xr sysmerge 8
and
.Xr MAKEDEV 8 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# sysmerge
# cd /dev && ./MAKEDEV all
.Ed
.Pp
At this point, the base system is up to date with the code
that will be made into a release.
.Ss 4. Make and validate the base system release
The base system release consists of at least one generic kernel,
some installation media, the release tarballs,
installation instructions, and checksum files.
.Pp
On arm64 and armv7 architectures, additional files are required.
Install the following packages using
.Xr pkg_add 1
or from
.Xr ports 7 :
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It arm64
raspberrypi-firmware u-boot-rpi
.It armv7
dtb u-boot-arm
.El
.Pp
Create a
.Va RELEASEDIR
directory to store the release files.
This directory must be writable by
.Sy build .
.Pp
To build a release, it is necessary to prepare a filesystem mounted with the
.Em noperm
.Xr mount 8
option.
Either standard FFS or
.Xr mount_mfs 8
may be used.
The root of this filesystem must have owner
.Sy build
and mode 700.
On this filesystem, create a
.Va DESTDIR
directory.
This will be the root of a complete
.Ox
installation.
.Pp
.Sy Warning :
.Va DESTDIR
and
.Va RELEASEDIR
must not refer to any directory with
.Pa /mnt
in its path, as
.Pa /mnt
is used in the release generation process.
The
.Xr vnd 4
device vnd0
is also used and must not be configured.
.Pp
Make the release and check the contents of the release tarballs:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# export DESTDIR=your-destdir RELEASEDIR=your-releasedir
# cd /usr/src/etc && make release
# cd /usr/src/distrib/sets && sh checkflist
# unset RELEASEDIR DESTDIR
.Ed
.Ss 5. Build and install Xenocara
Xenocara is based on the X.Org modular build system.
Its sources are supposed to be in
.Pa /usr/xenocara .
The
.Pa /usr/src
tree is also needed while building Xenocara.
The object directory
.Pa /usr/xobj
should be empty and owned by build:wobj with mode 770.
.Pp
The following steps will build and install Xenocara.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# cd /usr/xenocara
# make bootstrap
# make obj
# make build
.Ed
.Ss 6. Make and validate the Xenocara release
Xenocara uses
.Va DESTDIR
and
.Va RELEASEDIR
as described above.
Use a different
.Va DESTDIR
for the Xenocara release than for the base release,
as the contents of
.Va DESTDIR
will be removed.
.Pp
The steps to build and validate the Xenocara release are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# export DESTDIR=your-destdir RELEASEDIR=your-releasedir
# make release
# make checkdist
# unset RELEASEDIR DESTDIR
.Ed
.Pp
At this point,
.Ox
base system and X Window System tarballs are in
.Va RELEASEDIR .
.Ss 7. Create boot and installation disk images
The disk images
.No install${ Ns Va VERSION Ns }.img
and
.No install${ Ns Va VERSION Ns }.iso
are suitable for installs without network connectivity.
They contain the tarballs built in the previous steps.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# export RELDIR=your-releasedir RELXDIR=your-xenocara-releasedir
# cd /usr/src/distrib/$(machine)/iso && make
# make install
.Ed
.Pp
The two installer images are now stored in the local release
directory.
.Ss 8. Make the third party packages
The ports subsystem of contributed applications is capable of producing
packages for installation, either individually or in bulk.
This is described in
.Xr ports 7 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cvs 1 ,
.Xr pkg_add 1 ,
.Xr mk.conf 5 ,
.Xr ports 7 ,
.Xr sysmerge 8
