.\" Copyright (c) 1992/3 Theo de Raadt <deraadt@fsa.ca>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS
.\" OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)yp.8	1.0 (deraadt) 4/26/93
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 14, 2011
.Dt YP 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm yp
.Nd description of the YP/NIS system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm YP
subsystem allows network management of passwd, group, netgroup, hosts,
services, rpc, bootparams and ethers file
entries through the functions
.Xr getpwent 3 ,
.Xr getgrent 3 ,
.Xr getnetgrent 3 ,
.Xr gethostent 3 ,
.Xr getnetent 3 ,
.Xr getrpcent 3 ,
and
.Xr ethers 3 .
The
.Xr bootparamd 8
daemon makes direct
.Tn NIS
library calls since there are no
functions in the standard C library for reading bootparams.
.Tn NIS
support is enabled in
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 .
.Pp
The
.Nm YP
subsystem is started automatically in
.Pa /etc/rc
if it has been initialized in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
and if the directory
.Pa /var/yp
exists (which it does in the default distribution).
The default
.Tn NIS
domain must also be set with the
.Xr domainname 1
command, which will happen automatically at system startup if it is
specified in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf .
.Pp
.Tn NIS
is an
.Tn RPC Ns -based
client/server system that allows a group of
machines within an
.Tn NIS
domain to share a common set of configuration files.
This permits a system
administrator to set up
.Tn NIS
client systems with only minimal configuration
data and add, remove or modify configuration data from a single location.
.Pp
The canonical copies of all
.Tn NIS
information are stored on a single machine
called the
.Tn NIS
.Em "master server" .
The databases used to store the information are called
.Tn NIS
.Em maps .
In
.Fx ,
these maps are stored in
.Pa /var/yp/ Ns Aq Ar domainname
where
.Aq Ar domainname
is the name of the
.Tn NIS
domain being served.
A single
.Tn NIS
server can
support several domains at once, therefore it is possible to have several
such directories, one for each supported domain.
Each domain will have
its own independent set of maps.
.Pp
In
.Fx ,
the
.Tn NIS
maps are Berkeley DB hashed database files (the
same format used for the
.Xr passwd 5
database files).
Other operating systems that support
.Tn NIS
use old-style
.Nm ndbm
databases instead (largely because Sun Microsystems originally based
their
.Tn NIS
implementation on
.Nm ndbm ,
and other vendors have simply licensed
Sun's code rather than design their own implementation with a different
database format).
On these systems, the databases are generally split
into
.Pa .dir
and
.Pa .pag
files which the
.Nm ndbm
code uses to hold separate parts of the hash
database.
The Berkeley DB hash method instead uses a single file for
both pieces of information.
This means that while you may have
.Pa passwd.byname.dir
and
.Pa passwd.byname.pag
files on other operating systems (both of which are really parts of the
same map),
.Fx
will have only one file called
.Pa passwd.byname .
The difference in format is not significant: only the
.Tn NIS
server,
.Xr ypserv 8 ,
and related tools need to know the database format of the
.Tn NIS
maps.
Client
.Tn NIS
systems receive all
.Tn NIS
data in
.Tn ASCII
form.
.Pp
There are three main types of
.Tn NIS
systems:
.Bl -enum
.It
.Tn NIS
clients,
which query
.Tn NIS
servers for information.
.It
.Tn NIS
master servers,
which maintain the canonical copies of all
.Tn NIS
maps.
.It
.Tn NIS
slave servers,
which maintain backup copies of
.Tn NIS
maps that are periodically
updated by the master.
.El
.Pp
A
.Tn NIS
client establishes what is called a
.Em binding
to a particular
.Tn NIS
server using the
.Xr ypbind 8
daemon.
The
.Xr ypbind 8
utility checks the system's default domain (as set by the
.Xr domainname 1
command) and begins broadcasting
.Tn RPC
requests on the local network.
These requests specify the name of the domain for which
.Xr ypbind 8
is attempting to establish a binding.
If a server that has been
configured to serve the requested domain receives one of the broadcasts,
it will respond to
.Xr ypbind 8 ,
which will record the server's address.
If there are several servers
available (a master and several slaves, for example),
.Xr ypbind 8
will use the address of the first one to respond.
From that point
on, the client system will direct all of its
.Tn NIS
requests to that server.
The
.Xr ypbind 8
utility will occasionally
.Dq ping
the server to make sure it is still up
and running.
If it fails to receive a reply to one of its pings
within a reasonable amount of time,
.Xr ypbind 8
will mark the domain as unbound and begin broadcasting again in the
hopes of locating another server.
.Pp
.Tn NIS
master and slave servers handle all
.Tn NIS
requests with the
.Xr ypserv 8
daemon.
The
.Xr ypserv 8
utility is responsible for receiving incoming requests from
.Tn NIS
clients,
translating the requested domain and map name to a path to the
corresponding database file and transmitting data from the database
back to the client.
There is a specific set of requests that
.Xr ypserv 8
is designed to handle, most of which are implemented as functions
within the standard C library:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fn yp_master"
.It Fn yp_order
check the creation date of a particular map
.It Fn yp_master
obtain the name of the
.Tn NIS
master server for a given
map/domain
.It Fn yp_match
lookup the data corresponding to a given in key in a particular
map/domain
.It Fn yp_first
obtain the first key/data pair in a particular map/domain
.It Fn yp_next
pass
.Xr ypserv 8
a key in a particular map/domain and have it return the
key/data pair immediately following it (the functions
.Fn yp_first
and
.Fn yp_next
can be used to do a sequential search of an
.Tn NIS
map)
.It Fn yp_all
retrieve the entire contents of a map
.El
.Pp
There are a few other requests which
.Xr ypserv 8
is capable of handling (i.e., acknowledge whether or not you can handle
a particular domain
.Pq Dv YPPROC_DOMAIN ,
or acknowledge only if you can handle the domain and be silent otherwise
.Pq Dv YPPROC_DOMAIN_NONACK )
but
these requests are usually generated only by
.Xr ypbind 8
and are not meant to be used by standard utilities.
.Pp
On networks with a large number of hosts, it is often a good idea to
use a master server and several slaves rather than just a single master
server.
A slave server provides the exact same information as a master
server: whenever the maps on the master server are updated, the new
data should be propagated to the slave systems using the
.Xr yppush 8
command.
The
.Tn NIS
.Pa Makefile
.Pq Pa /var/yp/Makefile
will do this automatically if the administrator creates
.Pa /var/yp/Makefile.local
and empties the
.Va NOPUSH
variable:
.Bd -literal -offset four
.Li NOPUSH=
.Ed
.Pp
.Va ( NOPUSH
is set to true by default because the default configuration is
for a small network with only one
.Tn NIS
server).
The
.Xr yppush 8
command will initiate a transaction between the master and slave
during which the slave will transfer the specified maps from the
master server using
.Xr ypxfr 8 .
(The slave server calls
.Xr ypxfr 8
automatically from within
.Xr ypserv 8 ;
therefore it is not usually necessary for the administrator
to use it directly.
It can be run manually if
desired, however.)
Maintaining
slave servers helps improve
.Tn NIS
performance on large
networks by:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Providing backup services in the event that the
.Tn NIS
master crashes
or becomes unreachable
.It
Spreading the client load out over several machines instead of
causing the master to become overloaded
.It
Allowing a single
.Tn NIS
domain to extend beyond
a local network (the
.Xr ypbind 8
daemon might not be able to locate a server automatically if it resides on
a network outside the reach of its broadcasts.
It is possible to force
.Xr ypbind 8
to bind to a particular server with
.Xr ypset 8
but this is sometimes inconvenient.
This problem can be avoided simply by
placing a slave server on the local network.)
.El
.Pp
The
.Fx
.Xr ypserv 8
is specially designed to provide enhanced security (compared to
other
.Tn NIS
implementations) when used exclusively with
.Fx
client
systems.
The
.Fx
password database system (which is derived directly
from
.Bx 4.4 )
includes support for
.Em "shadow passwords" .
The standard password database does not contain users' encrypted
passwords: these are instead stored (along with other information)
in a separate database which is accessible only by the super-user.
If the encrypted password database were made available as an
.Tn NIS
map, this security feature would be totally disabled, since any user
is allowed to retrieve
.Tn NIS
data.
.Pp
To help prevent this,
.Fx Ns 's
.Tn NIS
server handles the shadow password maps
.Pa ( master.passwd.byname ,
.Pa master.passwd.byuid ,
.Pa shadow.byname
and
.Pa shadow.byuid )
in a special way: the server will only provide access to these
maps in response to requests that originate on privileged ports.
Since only the super-user is allowed to bind to a privileged port,
the server assumes that all such requests come from privileged
users.
All other requests are denied: requests from non-privileged
ports will receive only an error code from the server.
Additionally,
.Fx Ns 's
.Xr ypserv 8
includes support for
.An Wietse Venema Ns 's
tcp wrapper package; with tcp
wrapper support enabled, the administrator can configure
.Xr ypserv 8
to respond only to selected client machines.
.Pp
While these enhancements provide better security than stock
.Tn NIS ,
they are by no means 100% effective.
It is still possible for
someone with access to your network to spoof the server into disclosing
the shadow password maps.
.Pp
On the client side,
.Fx Ns 's
.Xr getpwent 3
functions will automatically search for the
.Pa master.passwd
maps and use them if they exist.
If they do, they will be used, and
all fields in these special maps (class, password age and account
expiration) will be decoded.
If they are not found, the standard
.Pa passwd
maps will be used instead.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
When using a
.No non- Ns Fx
.Tn NIS
server for
.Xr passwd 5
files, it is unlikely that the default MD5-based format that
.Fx
uses for passwords will be accepted by it.
If this is the case, the value of the
.Va passwd_format
setting in
.Xr login.conf 5
should be changed to
.Qq Li des
for compatibility.
.Pp
Some systems, such as
.Tn SunOS
4.x, need
.Tn NIS
to be running in order
for their hostname resolution functions
.Po Fn gethostbyname ,
.Fn gethostbyaddr ,
etc.
.Pc
to work properly.
On these systems,
.Xr ypserv 8
performs
.Tn DNS
lookups when asked to return information about
a host that does not exist in its
.Pa hosts.byname
or
.Pa hosts.byaddr
maps.
.Fx Ns 's
resolver uses
.Tn DNS
by default (it can be made to use
.Tn NIS ,
if desired), therefore its
.Tn NIS
server does not do
.Tn DNS
lookups
by default.
However,
.Xr ypserv 8
can be made to perform
.Tn DNS
lookups if it is started with a special
flag.
It can also be made to register itself as an
.Tn NIS
v1 server
in order to placate certain systems that insist on the presence of
a v1 server
.Po Fx
uses only
.Tn NIS
v2, but many other systems,
including
.Tn SunOS
4.x, search for both a v1 and v2 server when binding
.Pc .
.Fx Ns 's
.Xr ypserv 8
does not actually handle
.Tn NIS
v1 requests, but this
.Dq "kludge mode"
is useful for silencing stubborn systems that search for both
a v1 and v2 server.
.Pp
(Please see the
.Xr ypserv 8
manual page for a detailed description of these special features
and flags.)
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr domainname 1 ,
.Xr ypcat 1 ,
.Xr ypmatch 1 ,
.Xr ypwhich 1 ,
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 ,
.Xr yp_mkdb 8 ,
.Xr ypbind 8 ,
.Xr ypinit 8 ,
.Xr yppoll 8 ,
.Xr yppush 8 ,
.Xr ypserv 8 ,
.Xr ypset 8 ,
.Xr ypxfr 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm YP
subsystem was written from the ground up by
.An Theo de Raadt
to be compatible to Sun's implementation.
Bug fixes, improvements
and
.Tn NIS
server support were later added by
.An Bill Paul .
The server-side code was originally written by
.An Peter Eriksson
and
.An Tobias Reber
and is subject to the GNU Public License.
No Sun code was
referenced.
.Sh BUGS
While
.Fx
now has both
.Tn NIS
client and server capabilities, it does not yet have support for
.Xr ypupdated 8
or the
.Fn yp_update
function.
Both of these require secure
.Tn RPC ,
which
.Fx
does not
support yet either.
.Pp
The
.Xr getservent 3
and
.Xr getprotoent 3
functions do not yet have
.Tn NIS
support.
Fortunately, these files
do not need to be updated that often.
.Pp
Many more manual pages should be written, especially
.Xr ypclnt 3 .
For the time being, seek out a local Sun machine and read the
manuals for there.
.Pp
Neither Sun nor this author have found a clean way to handle
the problems that occur when ypbind cannot find its server
upon bootup.
