.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 John H. Baldwin <jhb@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 5, 2018
.Dt BUS_MAP_RESOURCE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bus_map_resource , bus_unmap_resource , resource_init_map_request
.Nd map or unmap an active resource
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Pp
.In machine/bus.h
.In sys/rman.h
.In machine/resource.h
.Ft int
.Fo bus_map_resource
.Fa "device_t dev" "int type" "struct resource *r"
.Fa "struct resource_map_request *args" "struct resource_map *map"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo bus_unmap_resource
.Fa "device_t dev" "int type" "struct resource *r" "struct resource_map *map"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn resource_init_map_request "struct resource_map_request *args"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions create or destroy a mapping of a previously activated
resource.
Mappings permit CPU access to the resource via the
.Xr bus_space 9
API.
.Pp
The arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fa dev
The device that owns the resource.
.It Fa type
The type of resource to map.
It is one of:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY" -compact
.It Dv SYS_RES_IOPORT
for I/O ports
.It Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY
for I/O memory
.El
.It Fa r
A pointer to the
.Vt "struct resource"
returned by
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 .
.It Fa args
A set of optional properties to apply when creating a mapping.
This argument can be set to
.Dv NULL
to request a mapping of the entire resource with the default properties.
.It Fa map
The resource mapping to create or destroy.
.El
.Ss Resource Mappings
Resource mappings are described by a
.Vt "struct resource_map"
object.
This structure contains a
.Xr bus_space 9
tag and handle in the
.Va r_bustag
and
.Va r_bushandle
members that can be used for CPU access to the mapping.
The structure also contains a
.Va r_vaddr
member which contains the virtual address of the mapping if one exists.
.Pp
The wrapper API for
.Vt "struct resource"
objects described in
.Xr bus_activate_resource 9
can also be used with
.Vt "struct resource_map" .
For example,
a pointer to a mapping object can be passed as the first argument to
.Fn bus_read_4 .
This wrapper API is preferred over using the
.Va r_bustag
and
.Va r_bushandle
members directly.
.Ss Optional Mapping Properties
The
.Vt "struct resource_map_request"
object passed in
.Fa args
can be used to specify optional properties of a mapping.
The structure must be initialized by invoking
.Fn resource_init_map_request .
Properties are then specified by setting one or more of these members:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va offset , length
These two members specify a region of the resource to map.
By default a mapping is created for the entire resource.
The
.Va offset
is relative to the start of the resource.
.It Va memattr
Specifies a memory attribute to use when mapping the resource.
By default memory mappings use the
.Dv VM_MEMATTR_UNCACHEABLE
attribute.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error is returned.
.Sh EXAMPLES
This maps a PCI memory BAR with the write-combining memory attribute and
reads the first 32-bit word:
.Bd -literal
	struct resource *r;
	struct resource_map map;
	struct resource_map_request req;
	uint32_t val;
	int rid;

	rid = PCIR_BAR(0);
	r = bus_alloc_resource_any(dev, SYS_RES_MEMORY, &rid, RF_ACTIVE |
	    RF_UNMAPPED);
	resource_init_map_request(&req);
	req.memattr = VM_MEMATTR_WRITE_COMBINING;
	bus_map_resource(dev, SYS_RES_MEMORY, r, &req, &map);
	val = bus_read_4(&map, 0);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bus_activate_resource 9 ,
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 ,
.Xr bus_space 9 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An John Baldwin Aq Mt jhb@FreeBSD.org .
