.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 M. Warner Losh
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 20, 2016
.Dt BUS_ACTIVATE_RESOURCE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bus_activate_resource , bus_deactivate_resource
.Nd activate or deactivate a resource
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Pp
.In machine/bus.h
.In sys/rman.h
.In machine/resource.h
.Ft int
.Fo bus_activate_resource
.Fa "device_t dev" "int type" "int rid" "struct resource *r"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo bus_deactivate_resource
.Fa "device_t dev" "int type" "int rid" "struct resource *r"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions activate or deactivate a previously allocated resource.
In general, resources must be activated before they can be accessed by
the driver.
Bus drivers may perform additional actions to ensure that the resource is
ready to be accessed.
For example,
the PCI bus driver enables memory decoding in a PCI device's command register
when activating a memory resource.
.Pp
The arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fa dev
The device that requests ownership of the resource.
Before allocation, the resource is owned by the parent bus.
.It Fa type
The type of resource you want to allocate.
It is one of:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY" -compact
.It Dv PCI_RES_BUS
for PCI bus numbers
.It Dv SYS_RES_IRQ
for IRQs
.It Dv SYS_RES_DRQ
for ISA DMA lines
.It Dv SYS_RES_IOPORT
for I/O ports
.It Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY
for I/O memory
.El
.It Fa rid
A pointer to a bus specific handle that identifies the resource being allocated.
.It Fa r
A pointer to the
.Vt "struct resource"
returned by
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 .
.El
.Ss Resource Mapping
Resources which can be mapped for CPU access by a
.Xr bus_space 9
tag and handle will create a mapping of the entire resource when activated.
The tag and handle for this mapping are stored in
.Fa r
and can be retrieved via
.Xr rman_get_bustag 9
and
.Xr rman_get_bushandle 9 .
These can be used with the
.Xr bus_space 9
API to access device registers or memory described by
.Fa r .
If the mapping is associated with a virtual address,
the virtual address can be retrieved via
.Xr rman_get_virtual 9 .
.Pp
This implicit mapping can be disabled by passing the
.Dv RF_UNMAPPED
flag to
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 .
A driver may use this if it wishes to allocate its own mappings of a resource
using
.Xr bus_map_resource 9 .
.Pp
A wrapper API for
.Xr bus_space 9
is also provided that accepts the associated resource as the first argument
in place of the
.Xr bus_space 9
tag and handle.
The functions in this wrapper API are named similarly to the
.Xr bus_space 9
API except that
.Dq _space
is removed from their name.
For example,
.Fn bus_read_4
can be used in place of
.Fn bus_space_read_4 .
The wrapper API is preferred in new drivers.
.Pp
These two statements both read a 32-bit register at the start of a
resource:
.Bd -literal
	bus_space_read_4(rman_get_bustag(res), rman_get_bushandle(res), 0);
	bus_read_4(res, 0);
.Ed
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 ,
.Xr bus_map_resource 9 ,
.Xr bus_space 9 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Warner Losh Aq Mt imp@FreeBSD.org .
