.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Jeroen Ruigrok van der Werven
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 3, 2010
.Dt BUS_SETUP_INTR 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BUS_SETUP_INTR ,
.Nm bus_setup_intr ,
.Nm BUS_TEARDOWN_INTR ,
.Nm bus_teardown_intr
.Nd create, attach and teardown an interrupt handler
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Ft int
.Fo BUS_SETUP_INTR
.Fa "device_t dev" "device_t child" "struct resource *irq" "int flags"
.Fa "driver_filter_t *filter" "driver_intr_t *ithread" "void *arg"
.Fa "void **cookiep"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo bus_setup_intr
.Fa "device_t dev" "struct resource *r" "int flags"
.Fa "driver_filter_t filter" "driver_intr_t ithread" "void *arg"
.Fa "void **cookiep"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo BUS_TEARDOWN_INTR
.Fa "device_t dev" "device_t child" "struct resource *irq" "void *cookiep"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn bus_teardown_intr "device_t dev" "struct resource *r" "void *cookiep"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn BUS_SETUP_INTR
method
will create and attach an interrupt handler to an interrupt
previously allocated by the resource manager's
.Xr BUS_ALLOC_RESOURCE 9
method.
The
.Fa flags
are found in
.In sys/bus.h ,
and give the broad category of interrupt.
The
.Fa flags
also tell the interrupt handlers about certain
device driver characteristics.
.Dv INTR_EXCL
marks the handler as being
an exclusive handler for this interrupt.
.Dv INTR_MPSAFE
tells the scheduler that the interrupt handler
is well behaved in a preemptive environment
(``SMP safe''),
and does not need
to be protected by the ``Giant Lock'' mutex.
.Dv INTR_ENTROPY
marks the interrupt as being a good source of entropy -
this may be used by the entropy device
.Pa /dev/random .
.Pp
To define a time-critical handler that will not execute any potentially
blocking operation, use the
.Fa filter
argument.
See the
.Sx "Filter Routines"
section below for information on writing a filter.
Otherwise, use the
.Fa ithread
argument.
The defined handler
will be called with the value
.Fa arg
as its only argument.
See the
.Sx "ithread Routines"
section below for more information on writing an interrupt handler.
.Pp
The
.Fa cookiep
argument is a pointer to a
.Vt "void *"
that
.Fn BUS_SETUP_INTR
will write a cookie for the parent bus' use to if it is successful in
establishing an interrupt.
Driver writers may assume that this cookie will be non-zero.
The nexus driver will write 0 on failure to
.Fa cookiep .
.Pp
The interrupt handler will be detached by
.Fn BUS_TEARDOWN_INTR .
The cookie needs to be passed to
.Fn BUS_TEARDOWN_INTR
in order to tear down the correct interrupt handler.
Once
.Fn BUS_TEARDOWN_INTR
returns, it is guaranteed that the interrupt function is not active and
will no longer be called.
.Pp
Mutexes are not allowed to be held across calls to these functions.
.Ss "Filter Routines"
A filter runs in primary interrupt context.
In this context, normal mutexes cannot be used.
Only the spin lock version of these can be used (specified by passing
.Dv MTX_SPIN
to
.Fn mtx_init
when initializing the mutex).
.Xr wakeup 9
and similar routines can be called.
Atomic operations from
.Pa machine/atomic
may be used.
Reads and writes to hardware through
.Xr bus_space 9
may be used.
PCI configuration registers may be read and written.
All other kernel interfaces cannot be used.
.Pp
In this restricted environment, care must be taken to account for all
races.
A careful analysis of races should be done as well.
It is generally cheaper to take an extra interrupt, for example, than
to protect variables with spinlocks.
Read, modify, write cycles of hardware registers need to be carefully
analyzed if other threads are accessing the same registers.
.Pp
Generally, a filter routine will use one of two strategies.
The first strategy is to simply mask the interrupt in hardware and
allow the
.Dv ithread
routine to read the state from the hardware and then reenable
interrupts.
The
.Dv ithread
also acknowledges the interrupt before re-enabling the interrupt
source in hardware.
Most PCI hardware can mask its interrupt source.
.Pp
The second common approach is to use a filter with multiple
.Xr taskqueue 9
tasks.
In this case, the filter acknowledges the interrupts and queues the
work to the appropriate taskqueue.
Where one has to multiplex different kinds of interrupt sources, like
a network card's transmit and receive paths, this can reduce lock
contention and increase performance.
.Pp
You should not
.Xr malloc 9
from inside a filter.
You may not call anything that uses a normal mutex.
Witness may complain about these.
.Ss "ithread Routines"
You can do whatever you want in an ithread routine, except sleep.
Care must be taken not to sleep in an ithread.
In addition, one should minimize lock contention in an ithread routine
because contested locks ripple over to all other ithread routines on
that interrupt.
.Ss "Sleeping"
Sleeping is voluntarily giving up control of your thread.
All the sleep routine found in
.Xr msleep 9
sleep.
Waiting for a condition variable described in
.Xr condvar 9
is sleeping.
Calling any function that does any of these things is sleeping.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success,
otherwise an appropriate error is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr random 4 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9 ,
.Xr locking 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Jeroen Ruigrok van der Werven Aq Mt asmodai@FreeBSD.org
based on the manual pages for
.Fn BUS_CREATE_INTR
and
.Fn BUS_CONNECT_INTR
written by
.An Doug Rabson Aq Mt dfr@FreeBSD.org .
