.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $DragonFly: src/share/man/man9/bus_get_resource.9,v 1.1 2008/11/09 09:48:41 swildner Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 26, 2015
.Dt BUS_GET_RESOURCE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bus_get_resource
.Nd "read a resource range/value with a given resource ID"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.In sys/rman.h
.Ft int
.Fo bus_get_resource
.Fa "device_t dev" "int type" "int rid" "rman_res_t *startp" "rman_res_t *countp"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn bus_get_resource
function reads the range or value of the resource
.Fa type , rid
pair and stores it in the
.Fa startp
and
.Fa countp
arguments.
.Pp
The arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa startp"
.It Fa dev
The device to read the resource from.
.It Fa type
The type of resource you want to read.
It is one of:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY" -compact
.It Dv SYS_RES_IRQ
for IRQs
.It Dv SYS_RES_DRQ
for ISA DMA lines
.It Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY
for I/O memory
.It Dv SYS_RES_IOPORT
for I/O ports
.El
.It Fa rid
A bus-specific handle that identifies the resource being read.
.It Fa startp
A pointer to the start address of this resource.
.It Fa countp
A pointer to the length of the resource.
For example, the size of the memory in bytes.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bus_set_resource 9 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Sascha Wildner .
