.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Alexander Langer
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 18, 2000
.Dt BUS_RELEASE_RESOURCE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bus_release_resource
.Nd release resources on a bus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Pp
.In machine/bus.h
.In sys/rman.h
.In machine/resource.h
.Ft int
.Fn bus_release_resource "device_t dev" "int type" "int rid" "struct resource *r"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Free a resource allocated by
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 .
The resource must not be in use on release, i.e., call an appropriate function
before (e.g.\&
.Xr bus_teardown_intr 9
for IRQs).
.Bl -item
.It
.Fa dev
is the device that owns the resource.
.It
.Fa type
is the type of resource that is released.
It must be of the same type you allocated it as before.
See
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9
for valid types.
.It
.Fa rid
is the resource ID of the resource.
The
.Fa rid
value must be the same as the one returned by
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 .
.It
.Fa r
is the pointer to
.Va struct resource ,
i.e., the resource itself,
returned by
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 .
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Er EINVAL
is returned, if the device
.Fa dev
has no parent,
.Dv 0
otherwise.
The kernel will panic, if it cannot release the resource.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
	/* deactivate IRQ */
	bus_teardown_intr(dev, foosoftc->irqres, foosoftc->irqid);

	/* release IRQ resource */
	bus_release_resource(dev, SYS_RES_IRQ, foosoftc->irqid,
		foosoftc->irqres);

	/* release I/O port resource */
	bus_release_resource(dev, SYS_RES_IOPORT, foosoftc->portid,
		foosoftc->portres);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alexander Langer Aq Mt alex@big.endian.de .
