.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Hudson River Trading LLC
.\" Written by: John H. Baldwin <jhb@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 9, 2015
.Dt BUS_DESCRIBE_INTR 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BUS_DESCRIBE_INTR ,
.Nm bus_describe_intr
.Nd "associate a description with an active interrupt handler"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Ft int
.Fo BUS_DESCRIBE_INTR
.Fa "device_t dev" "device_t child" "struct resource *irq" "void *cookie"
.Fa "const char *descr"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo bus_describe_intr
.Fa "device_t dev" "struct resource *irq" "void *cookie" "const char *fmt"
.Fa ...
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn BUS_DESCRIBE_INTR
method associates a description with an active interrupt handler.
The
.Fa cookie
parameter must be the value returned by a successful call to
.Xr BUS_SETUP_INTR 9
for the interrupt
.Fa irq .
.Pp
The
.Fn bus_describe_intr
function is a simple wrapper around
.Fn BUS_DESCRIBE_INTR .
As a convenience,
.Fn bus_describe_intr
allows the caller to use
.Xr printf 9
style formatting to build the description string using
.Fa fmt .
.Pp
When an interrupt handler is established by
.Xr BUS_SETUP_INTR 9 ,
the handler is named after the device the handler is established for.
This name is then used in various places such as interrupt statistics
displayed by
.Xr systat 1
and
.Xr vmstat 8 .
For devices that use a single interrupt,
the device name is sufficiently unique to identify the interrupt handler.
However, for devices that use multiple interrupts it can be useful to
distinguish the interrupt handlers.
When a description is set for an active interrupt handler,
a colon followed by the description is appended to the device name to form
the interrupt handler name.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an appropriate error is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr vmstat 8 ,
.Xr BUS_SETUP_INTR 9 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr printf 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn BUS_DESCRIBE_INTR
method and
.Fn bus_describe_intr
functions first appeared in
.Fx 8.1 .
.Sh BUGS
It is not currently possible to remove a description from an active interrupt
handler.
