.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 M. Warner Losh
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 29, 2003
.Dt BUS_SET_RESOURCE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bus_set_resource
.Nd "associate a definite resource with a given resource ID"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Pp
.In machine/bus.h
.In sys/rman.h
.In machine/resource.h
.Ft int
.Fo bus_set_resource
.Fa "device_t dev" "int type" "int rid" "rman_res_t start" "rman_res_t count"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn bus_set_resource
function
sets the start address of the resource
.Fa type , rid
pair to be
.Fa count
long.
Typically, client drivers do not use this interface.
Bus drivers, however, often use it to set up the resources a client
driver uses.
.Pp
The arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fa dev
The device to set the resource on.
.It Fa type
The type of resource you want to allocate.
It is one of:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY" -compact
.It Dv SYS_RES_IRQ
for IRQs
.It Dv SYS_RES_DRQ
for ISA DMA lines
.It Dv SYS_RES_IOPORT
for I/O ports
.It Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY
for I/O memory
.El
.It Fa rid
A bus-specific handle that identifies the resource being allocated.
.It Fa start
The start address of this resource.
.It Fa count
The length of the resource.
For example, the size of the memory in bytes.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 ,
.Xr bus_get_resource 9 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Warner Losh Aq Mt imp@FreeBSD.org .
