.\" Copyright (c) 1997
.\"	John-Mark Gurney.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY John-Mark Gurney AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 25, 2014
.Dt CD 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cd
.Nd CDROM driver for the CAM SCSI subsystem
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides a read-only interface for CDROM drives
.Tn ( SCSI
type 5)
and WORM drives
.Tn ( SCSI
type 4)
that support CDROM type commands.
Some drives do not behave as the driver expects.
See the
.Sx QUIRKS
section for information on possible flags.
.Sh QUIRKS
Each
.Tn CD-ROM
device can have different interpretations of the
.Tn SCSI
spec.
This can lead to drives requiring special handling in the driver.
The following is a list of quirks that the driver recognize.
.Bl -tag -width CD_Q_BCD_TRACKS
.It Dv CD_Q_NO_TOUCH
This flag tells the driver not to probe the drive at attach time to see if
there is a disk in the drive and find out what size it is.
This flag is currently unimplemented in the CAM
.Nm
driver.
.It Dv CD_Q_BCD_TRACKS
This flag is for broken drives that return the track numbers in packed BCD
instead of straight decimal.
If the drive seems to skip tracks
(tracks 10-15 are skipped)
then you have a drive that is in need of this flag.
.It Dv CD_Q_NO_CHANGER
This flag tells the driver that the device in question is not a changer.
This is only necessary for a CDROM device with multiple luns that are not a
part of a changer.
.It Dv CD_Q_CHANGER
This flag tells the driver that the given device is a multi-lun changer.
In general, the driver will figure this out automatically when it sees a
LUN greater than 0.
Setting this flag only has the effect of telling the
driver to run the initial read capacity command for LUN 0 of the changer
through the changer scheduling code.
.It Dv CD_Q_10_BYTE_ONLY
This flag tells the driver that the given device only accepts 10 byte MODE
SENSE/MODE SELECT commands.
In general these types of quirks should not be
added to the
.Xr cd 4
driver.
The reason is that the driver does several things to attempt to
determine whether the drive in question needs 10 byte commands.
First, it
issues a CAM Path Inquiry command to determine whether the protocol that
the drive speaks typically only allows 10 byte commands.
(ATAPI and USB
are two prominent examples of protocols where you generally only want to
send 10 byte commands.)
Then, if it gets an ILLEGAL REQUEST error back
from a 6 byte MODE SENSE or MODE SELECT command, it attempts to send the 10
byte version of the command instead.
The only reason you would need a
quirk is if your drive uses a protocol (e.g.,
.Tn SCSI )
that typically does not have a problem with 6 byte commands.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /sys/cam/scsi/scsi_cd.c -compact
.It Pa /sys/cam/scsi/scsi_cd.c
is the driver source file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This
manual page was written by
.An John-Mark Gurney Aq Mt jmg@FreeBSD.org .
It was updated for CAM and
.Fx 3.0
by
.An Kenneth Merry Aq Mt ken@FreeBSD.org .
