.\"	$OpenBSD: cond_init.9,v 1.5 2025/07/28 13:33:17 schwarze Exp $ */
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 David Gwynne <dlg@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 28 2025 $
.Dt COND_INIT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cond_init ,
.Nm cond_wait ,
.Nm cond_signal ,
.Nm COND_INITIALIZER
.Nd wait condition API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/systm.h
.Ft void
.Fn "cond_init" "struct cond *c"
.Ft void
.Fn "cond_wait" "struct cond *c" "const char *wmesg"
.Ft void
.Fn "cond_signal" "struct cond *c"
.Ft void
.Fn "cond_signal_handler" "void *c"
.Fn "COND_INITIALIZER"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The wait condition API allows a thread to sleep while it waits for
a notification, aka signal, that pending work has completed.
.Pp
.Fn cond_init
initialises the wait condition
.Fa c
for use.
.Pp
.Fn cond_wait
is used to sleep on the wait condition
.Fa c
until whatever the thread is waiting on calls
.Fn cond_signal
or
.Fn cond_signal_handler .
.Fa wmesg
is a pointer to a character string indicating the reason the thread
is sleeping.
.Pp
.Fn cond_signal
and
.Fn cond_signal_handler
notify the thread waiting on
.Fa c
that the work has finished and it may proceed.
.Fn cond_signal
and
.Fn cond_signal_handler
operate identically, the only difference is the type of argument they take.
.Fn cond_signal_handler
takes a
.Ft void *
argument, allowing it to be used directly with APIs such as
.Xr task_set 9
and
.Xr timeout_set 9 .
.Pp
.Fn COND_INITIALIZER
initialises a declaration of a cond for use.
.Sh CONTEXT
.Fn cond_init ,
.Fn cond_signal ,
and
.Fn cond_signal_handler
can be called during autoconf, from process context, or from interrupt
context.
.Pp
.Fn cond_wait
can be called from process context.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Xr taskq_barrier 9
is implemented using the wait condition API.
The following is a commented copy of the implementation:
.Bd -literal
static void	taskq_barrier_task(void *);

void
taskq_barrier(struct taskq *tq)
{
	struct cond c;
	struct task t;

	/*
	 * any currently running work has to have finished
	 * before this new task can be run.
	 */

	cond_init(&c);
	task_init(&t, taskq_barrier_task, &c);

	task_add(tq, &t);

	/* wait until the task runs and signals completion */
	cond_wait(&c, "tqbar");
}

static void
taskq_barrier_task(void *p)
{
	struct cond *c = p;

	/*
	 * all previous tasks have run, signal the thread waiting
	 * in taskq_barrier
	 */

	cond_signal(c);
}
.Ed
