.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000 Jason Evans <jasone@FreeBSD.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 19, 2013
.Dt CONDVAR 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm condvar ,
.Nm cv_init ,
.Nm cv_destroy ,
.Nm cv_wait ,
.Nm cv_wait_sig ,
.Nm cv_wait_unlock ,
.Nm cv_timedwait ,
.Nm cv_timedwait_sbt ,
.Nm cv_timedwait_sig ,
.Nm cv_timedwait_sig_sbt ,
.Nm cv_signal ,
.Nm cv_broadcast ,
.Nm cv_broadcastpri ,
.Nm cv_wmesg
.Nd kernel condition variable
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/proc.h
.In sys/condvar.h
.Ft void
.Fn cv_init "struct cv *cvp" "const char *desc"
.Ft void
.Fn cv_destroy "struct cv *cvp"
.Ft void
.Fn cv_wait "struct cv *cvp" "lock"
.Ft int
.Fn cv_wait_sig "struct cv *cvp" "lock"
.Ft void
.Fn cv_wait_unlock "struct cv *cvp" "lock"
.Ft int
.Fn cv_timedwait "struct cv *cvp" "lock" "int timo"
.Ft int
.Fn cv_timedwait_sbt "struct cv *cvp" "lock" "sbintime_t sbt" \
"sbintime_t pr" "int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig "struct cv *cvp" "lock" "int timo"
.Ft int
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig_sbt "struct cv *cvp" "lock" "sbintime_t sbt" \
"sbintime_t pr" "int flags"
.Ft void
.Fn cv_signal "struct cv *cvp"
.Ft void
.Fn cv_broadcast "struct cv *cvp"
.Ft void
.Fn cv_broadcastpri "struct cv *cvp" "int pri"
.Ft const char *
.Fn cv_wmesg "struct cv *cvp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Condition variables are used in conjunction with mutexes to wait for conditions
to occur.
Condition variables are created with
.Fn cv_init ,
where
.Fa cvp
is a pointer to space for a
.Vt struct cv ,
and
.Fa desc
is a pointer to a null-terminated character string that describes the condition
variable.
Condition variables are destroyed with
.Fn cv_destroy .
Threads wait on condition variables by calling
.Fn cv_wait ,
.Fn cv_wait_sig ,
.Fn cv_wait_unlock ,
.Fn cv_timedwait ,
or
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig .
Threads unblock waiters by calling
.Fn cv_signal
to unblock one waiter, or
.Fn cv_broadcast
or
.Fn cv_broadcastpri
to unblock all waiters.
In addition to waking waiters,
.Fn cv_broadcastpri
ensures that all of the waiters have a priority of at least
.Fa pri
by raising the priority of any threads that do not.
.Fn cv_wmesg
returns the description string of
.Fa cvp ,
as set by the initial call to
.Fn cv_init .
.Pp
The
.Fa lock
argument is a pointer to either a
.Xr mutex 9 ,
.Xr rwlock 9 ,
or
.Xr sx 9
lock.
A
.Xr mutex 9
argument must be initialized with
.Dv MTX_DEF
and not
.Dv MTX_SPIN .
A thread must hold
.Fa lock
before calling
.Fn cv_wait ,
.Fn cv_wait_sig ,
.Fn cv_wait_unlock ,
.Fn cv_timedwait ,
or
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig .
When a thread waits on a condition,
.Fa lock
is atomically released before the thread is blocked, then reacquired
before the function call returns.
In addition, the thread will fully drop the
.Va Giant
mutex
(even if recursed)
while the it is suspended and will reacquire the
.Va Giant
mutex before the function returns.
The
.Fn cv_wait_unlock
function does not reacquire the lock before returning.
Note that the
.Va Giant
mutex may be specified as
.Fa lock .
However,
.Va Giant
may not be used as
.Fa lock
for the
.Fn cv_wait_unlock
function.
All waiters must pass the same
.Fa lock
in conjunction with
.Fa cvp .
.Pp
When
.Fn cv_wait ,
.Fn cv_wait_sig ,
.Fn cv_wait_unlock ,
.Fn cv_timedwait ,
and
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig
unblock, their calling threads are made runnable.
.Fn cv_timedwait
and
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig
wait for at most
.Fa timo
/
.Dv HZ
seconds before being unblocked and returning
.Er EWOULDBLOCK ;
otherwise, they return 0.
.Fn cv_wait_sig
and
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig
return prematurely with a value of
.Er EINTR
or
.Er ERESTART
if a signal is caught, or 0 if signaled via
.Fn cv_signal
or
.Fn cv_broadcast .
.Pp
.Fn cv_timedwait_sbt
and
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig_sbt
functions take
.Fa sbt
argument instead of
.Fa timo .
It allows to specify relative or absolute unblock time with higher resolution
in form of
.Vt sbintime_t .
The parameter
.Fa pr
allows to specify wanted absolute event precision.
The parameter
.Fa flags
allows to pass additional
.Fn callout_reset_sbt
flags.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
.Fn cv_wait_sig ,
.Fn cv_timedwait ,
and
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig
return 0.
Otherwise, a non-zero error code is returned.
.Pp
.Fn cv_wmesg
returns the description string that was passed to
.Fn cv_init .
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn cv_wait_sig
and
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINTR
A signal was caught and the system call should be interrupted.
.It Bq Er ERESTART
A signal was caught and the system call should be restarted.
.El
.Pp
.Fn cv_timedwait
and
.Fn cv_timedwait_sig
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EWOULDBLOCK
Timeout expired.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr locking 9 ,
.Xr mtx_pool 9 ,
.Xr mutex 9 ,
.Xr rwlock 9 ,
.Xr sema 9 ,
.Xr sleep 9 ,
.Xr sx 9 ,
.Xr timeout 9
