.\"     $OpenBSD: config_attach.9,v 1.4 2025/06/13 18:34:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"     $NetBSD: autoconf.9,v 1.9 2002/02/13 08:18:35 ross Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Gregory McGarry.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 13 2025 $
.Dt CONFIG_ATTACH 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm config_attach ,
.Nm config_detach ,
.Nm config_detach_children
.Nd attach and detach devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/device.h
.Ft struct device *
.Fn config_attach "struct device *parent" "void *cf" "void *aux" \
                  "cfprint_t print"
.Ft int
.Fn config_detach "struct device *dev" "int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn config_detach_children "struct device *parent" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn config_attach
function attaches a found device.
Memory is allocated for the
.Em softc
structure and the driver's attach function is called according to the
configuration table.
If successful,
.Fn config_attach
returns the
.Em softc .
If unsuccessful, it returns
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
The
.Fn config_detach
function is called by the parent to detach the child device.
The second argument
.Fa flags
contains detachment flags:
.Bd -literal
#define	DETACH_FORCE	0x01	/* Force detachment; hardware gone */
#define	DETACH_QUIET	0x02	/* Don't print a notice */
.Ed
.Sh CONTEXT
.Fn config_detach
is always called from process context, allowing
.Xr tsleep 9
to be called while the device detaches itself (to deal with processes
which have a device open).
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn config_detach
returns zero if successful and an error code otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr config_found 9
