.\"     $OpenBSD: config_defer.9,v 1.3 2025/06/13 18:34:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"     $NetBSD: autoconf.9,v 1.9 2002/02/13 08:18:35 ross Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Gregory McGarry.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 13 2025 $
.Dt CONFIG_DEFER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm config_defer ,
.Nm config_mountroot
.Nd deferred device configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/device.h
.Ft void
.Fn config_defer "struct device *dev" "void (*func)(struct device *)"
.Ft void
.Fn config_mountroot "struct device *dev" "void (*func)(struct device *)"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn config_defer
function is called by the child to defer the remainder of its configuration
until all its parent devices have been attached.
At this point, the function
.Fa func
is called with the argument
.Fa dev .
.Pp
The
.Fn config_mountroot
function is called by a device driver to defer the remainder of its
configuration until after the root file system is mounted.
At this point, the function
.Fa func
is called with the argument
.Fa dev .
