.\" $OpenBSD: cpu_xcall.9,v 1.2 2025/07/13 19:36:42 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 David Gwynne <dlg@openbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 13 2025 $
.Dt CPU_XCALL 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cpu_xcall_set ,
.Nm cpu_xcall ,
.Nm cpu_xcall_sync ,
.Nm XCALL_INITIALIZER
.Nd CPU crosscall API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/xcall.h
.Ft void
.Fn cpu_xcall_set "struct xcall *xc" "void (*func)(void *)" "void *arg"
.Ft void
.Fn cpu_xcall "struct cpu_info *ci" "struct xcall *xc"
.Ft void
.Fo cpu_xcall_sync
.Fa "struct cpu_info *ci"
.Fa "void (*func)(void *)"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fa "const char *wmesg"
.Fc
.Fn XCALL_INITIALIZER "void (*func)(void *)" "void *arg"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
CPU crosscall API
supports the dispatch of function execution to a specific CPU
in the kernel.
The functions are run in a software interrupt context at
.Dv IPL_SOFTCLOCK .
.Pp
The
.Fn cpu_xcall_set
function prepares the xcall structure
.Fa xc
to call the function
.Fa func
with argument
.Fa arg
via future calls to
.Fn cpu_xcall .
.Pp
.Fn cpu_xcall
dispatches a call to a function with an argument represented by
.Fa xc
on the CPU specified by the
.Fa ci
cpu_info structure.
The same
.Fa xc
may be scheduled for execution on multiple CPUs concurrently.
.Pp
.Fn cpu_xcall_sync
dispatches a call to the function
.Fa func
with argument
.Fa arg
on the CPU specified by the
.Fa ci
cpu_info structure, and waits for that function to complete.
.Fn cpu_xcall_sync
may sleep waiting for the call to
.Fa func
to complete with
.Fa wmesg
as the wait message.
.Pp
.Fn XCALL_INITIALIZER
initialises a
.Vt xcall
structure to call the function
.Fa func
with argument
.Fa arg
via future calls to
.Fn cpu_xcall .
.Sh CONTEXT
.Fn cpu_xcall_set
and
.Fn cpu_xcall
can be called from process context or from interrupt context.
.Pp
.Fn cpu_xcall_sync
can be called from process context.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr spl 9 ,
.Xr tsleep 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
functions first appeared in
.Ox 7.8 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
functions were written by
.An David Gwynne Aq Mt dlg@openbsd.org .
