.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Conrad Meyer <cem@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS''
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 29, 2016
.Dt CPUSET 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cpuset(9)
\(em
.Nm CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER ,
.Nm CPUSET_FSET ,
.Nm CPU_CLR ,
.Nm CPU_COPY ,
.Nm CPU_ISSET ,
.Nm CPU_SET ,
.Nm CPU_ZERO ,
.Nm CPU_FILL ,
.Nm CPU_SETOF ,
.Nm CPU_EMPTY ,
.Nm CPU_ISFULLSET ,
.Nm CPU_FFS ,
.Nm CPU_COUNT ,
.Nm CPU_SUBSET ,
.Nm CPU_OVERLAP ,
.Nm CPU_CMP ,
.Nm CPU_OR ,
.Nm CPU_AND ,
.Nm CPU_NAND ,
.Nm CPU_CLR_ATOMIC ,
.Nm CPU_SET_ATOMIC ,
.Nm CPU_SET_ATOMIC_ACQ ,
.Nm CPU_AND_ATOMIC ,
.Nm CPU_OR_ATOMIC ,
.Nm CPU_COPY_STORE_REL
.Nd cpuset manipulation macros
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/_cpuset.h
.In sys/cpuset.h
.\"
.Fn CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER "ARRAY_CONTENTS"
.Vt CPUSET_FSET
.\"
.Fn CPU_CLR "size_t cpu_idx" "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Fn CPU_COPY "cpuset_t *from" "cpuset_t *to"
.Ft bool
.Fn CPU_ISSET "size_t cpu_idx" "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Fn CPU_SET "size_t cpu_idx" "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Fn CPU_ZERO "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Fn CPU_FILL "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Fn CPU_SETOF "size_t cpu_idx" "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Ft bool
.Fn CPU_EMPTY "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Ft bool
.Fn CPU_ISFULLSET "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Ft int
.Fn CPU_FFS "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Ft int
.Fn CPU_COUNT "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.\"
.Ft bool
.Fn CPU_SUBSET "cpuset_t *haystack" "cpuset_t *needle"
.Ft bool
.Fn CPU_OVERLAP "cpuset_t *cpuset1" "cpuset_t *cpuset2"
.Ft bool
.Fn CPU_CMP "cpuset_t *cpuset1" "cpuset_t *cpuset2"
.Fn CPU_OR "cpuset_t *dst" "cpuset_t *src"
.Fn CPU_AND "cpuset_t *dst" "cpuset_t *src"
.Fn CPU_NAND "cpuset_t *dst" "cpuset_t *src"
.\"
.Fn CPU_CLR_ATOMIC "size_t cpu_idx" "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Fn CPU_SET_ATOMIC "size_t cpu_idx" "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.Fn CPU_SET_ATOMIC_ACQ "size_t cpu_idx" "cpuset_t *cpuset"
.\"
.Fn CPU_AND_ATOMIC "cpuset_t *dst" "cpuset_t *src"
.Fn CPU_OR_ATOMIC "cpuset_t *dst" "cpuset_t *src"
.Fn CPU_COPY_STORE_REL "cpuset_t *from" "cpuset_t *to"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
family of macros provide a flexible and efficient CPU set implementation,
backed by the
.Xr bitset 9
macros.
Each CPU is represented by a single bit.
The maximum number of CPUs representable by
.Vt cpuset_t
is
.Va MAXCPU .
Individual CPUs in cpusets are referenced with indices zero through
.Fa MAXCPU - 1 .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER
macro allows one to initialize a
.Vt cpuset_t
with a compile time literal value.
.Pp
The
.Fn CPUSET_FSET
macro defines a compile time literal, usable by
.Fn CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER ,
representing a full cpuset (all CPUs present).
For examples of
.Fn CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER
and
.Fn CPUSET_FSET
usage, see the
.Sx CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER EXAMPLE
section.
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_CLR
macro removes CPU
.Fa cpu_idx
from the cpuset pointed to by
.Fa cpuset .
The
.Fn CPU_CLR_ATOMIC
macro is identical, but the bit representing the CPU is cleared with atomic
machine instructions.
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_COPY
macro copies the contents of the cpuset
.Fa from
to the cpuset
.Fa to .
.Fn CPU_COPY_STORE_REL
is similar, but copies component machine words from
.Fa from
and writes them to
.Fa to
with atomic store with release semantics.
(That is, if
.Fa to
is composed of multiple machine words,
.Fn CPU_COPY_STORE_REL
performs multiple individually atomic operations.)
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_SET
macro adds CPU
.Fa cpu_idx
to the cpuset pointed to by
.Fa cpuset ,
if it is not already present.
The
.Fn CPU_SET_ATOMIC
macro is identical, but the bit representing the CPU is set with atomic
machine instructions.
The
.Fn CPU_SET_ATOMIC_ACQ
macro sets the bit representing the CPU with atomic acquire semantics.
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_ZERO
macro removes all CPUs from
.Fa cpuset .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_FILL
macro adds all CPUs to
.Fa cpuset .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_SETOF
macro removes all CPUs in
.Fa cpuset
before adding only CPU
.Fa cpu_idx .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_EMPTY
macro returns
.Dv true
if
.Fa cpuset
is empty.
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_ISFULLSET
macro returns
.Dv true
if
.Fa cpuset
is full (the set of all CPUs).
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_FFS
macro returns the 1-index of the first (lowest) CPU in
.Fa cpuset ,
or zero if
.Fa cpuset
is empty.
Like with
.Xr ffs 3 ,
to use the non-zero result of
.Fn CPU_FFS
as a
.Fa cpu_idx
index parameter to any other
.Nm
macro, you must subtract one from the result.
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_COUNT
macro returns the total number of CPUs in
.Fa cpuset .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_SUBSET
macro returns
.Dv true
if
.Fa needle
is a subset of
.Fa haystack .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_OVERLAP
macro returns
.Dv true
if
.Fa cpuset1
and
.Fa cpuset2
have any common CPUs.
(That is, if
.Fa cpuset1
AND
.Fa cpuset2
is not the empty set.)
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_CMP
macro returns
.Dv true
if
.Fa cpuset1
is NOT equal to
.Fa cpuset2 .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_OR
macro adds CPUs present in
.Fa src
to
.Fa dst .
(It is the
.Nm
equivalent of the scalar:
.Fa dst
|=
.Fa src . )
.Fn CPU_OR_ATOMIC
is similar, but sets the bits representing CPUs in the component machine words
in
.Fa dst
with atomic machine instructions.
(That is, if
.Fa dst
is composed of multiple machine words,
.Fn CPU_OR_ATOMIC
performs multiple individually atomic operations.)
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_AND
macro removes CPUs absent from
.Fa src
from
.Fa dst .
(It is the
.Nm
equivalent of the scalar:
.Fa dst
&=
.Fa src . )
.Fn CPU_AND_ATOMIC
is similar, with the same atomic semantics as
.Fn CPU_OR_ATOMIC .
.Pp
The
.Fn CPU_NAND
macro removes CPUs in
.Fa src
from
.Fa dst .
(It is the
.Nm
equivalent of the scalar:
.Fa dst
&=
.Fa ~ src . )
.Sh CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal
cpuset_t myset;

/* Initialize myset to filled (all CPUs) */
myset = CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER(CPUSET_FSET);

/* Initialize myset to only the lowest CPU */
myset = CPUSET_T_INITIALIZER(0x1);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cpuset 1 ,
.Xr cpuset 2 ,
.Xr bitset 9
.Sh HISTORY
.In sys/cpuset.h
first appeared in
.Fx 7.1 ,
released in January 2009, and in
.Fx 8.0 ,
released in November 2009.
.Pp
This manual page first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
macros were written by
.An Jeff Roberson Aq Mt jeff@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Conrad Meyer Aq Mt cem@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
Unlike every other reference to individual set members, which are zero-indexed,
.Fn CPU_FFS
returns a one-indexed result (or zero if the cpuset is empty).
