.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Joseph Koshy <jkoshy@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 11, 2003
.Dt CR_SEEOTHERUIDS 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cr_seeotheruids
.Nd determine visibility of objects given their user credentials
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ft int
.Fn cr_seeotheruids "struct ucred *u1" "struct ucred *u2"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This function determines the visibility of objects in the
kernel based on the real user IDs in the credentials
.Fa u1
and
.Fa u2
associated with them.
.Pp
The visibility of objects is influenced by the
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
.Va security.bsd.see_other_uids .
If this variable is non-zero then all objects in the kernel
are visible to each other irrespective of their user IDs.
If this variable is zero then the object with credentials
.Fa u2
is visible to the object with credentials
.Fa u1
if either
.Fa u1
is the super-user credential, or if
.Fa u1
and
.Fa u2
have the same real user ID.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va security.bsd.see_other_uids
Must be non-zero if objects with unprivileged credentials are to be
able to see each other.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
This function returns zero if the object with credential
.Fa u1
can
.Dq see
the object with credential
.Fa u2 ,
or
.Er ESRCH
otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cr_seeothergids 9 ,
.Xr p_candebug 9
