.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Alexander Langer
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 13, 2018
.Dt DECLARE_MODULE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm DECLARE_MODULE
.Nd kernel module declaration macro
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/kernel.h
.In sys/module.h
.Fn DECLARE_MODULE "name" "moduledata_t data" "sub" "order"
.Fn DECLARE_MODULE_TIED "name" "moduledata_t data" "sub" "order"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn DECLARE_MODULE
macro declares a generic kernel module.
It is used to register the module with the system, using the
.Fn SYSINIT
macro.
.Fn DECLARE_MODULE
is usually used within other macros, such as
.Xr DRIVER_MODULE 9 ,
.Xr DEV_MODULE 9
and
.Xr SYSCALL_MODULE 9 .
Of course, it can also be called directly, for example in
order to implement dynamic sysctls.
.Pp
A module declared with
.Fn DECLARE_MODULE_TIED
will load only if the running kernel version
(as specified by
.Dv __FreeBSD_version )
is identical to that on which it was built.
This declaration should be used by modules which depend on interfaces beyond
the stable kernel KBI (such as ABI emulators or hypervisors that rely on
internal kernel structures).
.Fn DECLARE_MODULE
will behave like 
.Fn DECLARE_MODULE_TIED
when compiled with modules built with the kernel. This allows locks and
other synchronization primitives to be inlined safely.
.Pp
The arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fa name
The module name, which will be used in the
.Fn SYSINIT
call to identify the module.
.It Fa data
A
.Vt moduledata_t
structure, which contains two main items, the official name of the
module name, which will be used in the
.Vt module_t
structure and a pointer to the event handler function of type
.Vt modeventhand_t .
.It Fa sub
An argument directed to the
.Fn SYSINIT
macro.
Valid values for this are contained in the
.Vt sysinit_sub_id
enumeration
(see
.In sys/kernel.h )
and specify the type of system startup interfaces.
The
.Xr DRIVER_MODULE 9
macro uses a value of
.Dv SI_SUB_DRIVERS
here for example, since these modules contain a driver for a device.
For kernel modules that are loaded at runtime, a value of
.Dv SI_SUB_EXEC
is common.
.It Fa order
An argument for
.Fn SYSINIT .
It represents the KLDs order of initialization within the subsystem.
Valid values are defined in the
.Vt sysinit_elem_order
enumeration
.Pq In sys/kernel.h .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr DEV_MODULE 9 ,
.Xr DRIVER_MODULE 9 ,
.Xr module 9 ,
.Xr SYSCALL_MODULE 9
.Pp
.Pa /usr/include/sys/kernel.h ,
.Pa /usr/share/examples/kld
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Alexander Langer Aq Mt alex@FreeBSD.org ,
inspired by the KLD Facility Programming Tutorial by
.An Andrew Reiter Aq Mt arr@watson.org .
