.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Konstantin Belousov
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 2, 2015
.Dt DEVFS_CDEVPRIV 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm devfs_set_cdevpriv ,
.Nm devfs_get_cdevpriv ,
.Nm devfs_clear_cdevpriv
.Nd manage per-open filedescriptor data for devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/conf.h
.Bd -literal
typedef	void d_priv_dtor_t(void *data);
.Ed
.Ft int
.Fn devfs_get_cdevpriv "void **datap"
.Ft int
.Fn devfs_set_cdevpriv "void *priv" "d_priv_dtor_t *dtr"
.Ft void
.Fn devfs_clear_cdevpriv "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn devfs_xxx_cdevpriv
family of functions allows the
.Fa cdev
driver methods to associate some driver-specific data with each
user process
.Xr open 2
of the device special file.
Currently, functioning of these functions is restricted to the context
of the
.Fa cdevsw
switch method calls performed as
.Xr devfs 5
operations in response to system calls that use filedescriptors.
.Pp
The
.Fn devfs_set_cdevpriv
function associates a data pointed by
.Va priv
with current calling context (filedescriptor).
The data may be retrieved later, possibly from another call
performed on this filedescriptor, by the
.Fn devfs_get_cdevpriv
function.
The
.Fn devfs_clear_cdevpriv
disassociates previously attached data from context.
Immediately after
.Fn devfs_clear_cdevpriv
finished operating, the
.Va dtr
callback is called, with private data supplied
.Va data
argument.
The
.Fn devfs_clear_cdevpriv
function will be also be called if the open callback
function returns an error code.
.Pp
On the last filedescriptor close, system automatically arranges
.Fn devfs_clear_cdevpriv
call.
.Pp
If successful, the functions return 0.
.Pp
The function
.Fn devfs_set_cdevpriv
returns the following values on error:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The current call is not associated with some filedescriptor.
.It Bq Er EBUSY
The private driver data is already associated with current
filedescriptor.
.El
.Pp
The function
.Fn devfs_get_cdevpriv
returns the following values on error:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EBADF
The current call is not associated with some filedescriptor.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The private driver data was not associated with current
filedescriptor, or
.Fn devfs_clear_cdevpriv
was called.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr open 2 ,
.Xr devfs 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn devfs_cdevpriv
family of functions first appeared in
.Fx 7.1 .
