.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 Kenneth D. Merry.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 22, 2018
.Dt DEVSTAT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm devstat ,
.Nm devstat_add_entry ,
.Nm devstat_end_transaction ,
.Nm devstat_end_transaction_bio ,
.Nm devstat_end_transaction_bio_bt ,
.Nm devstat_remove_entry ,
.Nm devstat_start_transaction ,
.Nm devstat_start_transaction_bio
.Nd kernel interface for keeping device statistics
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/devicestat.h
.Ft void
.Fo devstat_add_entry
.Fa "struct devstat *ds"
.Fa "const char *dev_name"
.Fa "int unit_number"
.Fa "uint32_t block_size"
.Fa "devstat_support_flags flags"
.Fa "devstat_type_flags device_type"
.Fa "devstat_priority priority"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn devstat_remove_entry "struct devstat *ds"
.Ft void
.Fo devstat_start_transaction
.Fa "struct devstat *ds"
.Fa "const struct bintime *now"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo devstat_start_transaction_bio
.Fa "struct devstat *ds"
.Fa "struct bio *bp"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo devstat_end_transaction
.Fa "struct devstat *ds"
.Fa "uint32_t bytes"
.Fa "devstat_tag_type tag_type"
.Fa "devstat_trans_flags flags"
.Fa "const struct bintime *now"
.Fa "const struct bintime *then"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo devstat_end_transaction_bio
.Fa "struct devstat *ds"
.Fa "const struct bio *bp"
.Fc
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo devstat_end_transaction_bio_bt
.Fa "struct devstat *ds"
.Fa "const struct bio *bp"
.Fa "const struct bintime *now"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The devstat subsystem is an interface for recording device
statistics, as its name implies.
The idea is to keep reasonably detailed
statistics while utilizing a minimum amount of CPU time to record them.
Thus, no statistical calculations are actually performed in the kernel
portion of the
.Nm
code.
Instead, that is left for user programs to handle.
.Pp
The historical and antiquated
.Nm
model assumed a single active IO operation per device, which is not accurate
for most disk-like drivers in the 2000s and beyond.
New consumers of the interface should almost certainly use only the "bio"
variants of the start and end transacation routines.
.Pp
.Fn devstat_add_entry
registers a device with the
.Nm
subsystem.
The caller is expected to have already allocated \fBand zeroed\fR
the devstat structure before calling this function.
.Fn devstat_add_entry
takes several arguments:
.Bl -tag -width device_type
.It ds
The
.Va devstat
structure, allocated and zeroed by the client.
.It dev_name
The device name, e.g., da, cd, sa.
.It unit_number
Device unit number.
.It block_size
Block size of the device, if supported.
If the device does not support a
block size, or if the blocksize is unknown at the time the device is added
to the
.Nm
list, it should be set to 0.
.It flags
Flags indicating operations supported or not supported by the device.
See below for details.
.It device_type
The device type.
This is broken into three sections: base device type
(e.g., direct access, CDROM, sequential access), interface type (IDE, SCSI
or other) and a pass-through flag to indicate pas-through devices.
See below for a complete list of types.
.It priority
The device priority.
The priority is used to determine how devices are
sorted within
.Nm devstat Ns 's
list of devices.
Devices are sorted first by priority (highest to lowest),
and then by attach order.
See below for a complete list of available
priorities.
.El
.Pp
.Fn devstat_remove_entry
removes a device from the
.Nm
subsystem.
It takes the devstat structure for the device in question as
an argument.
The
.Nm
generation number is incremented and the number of devices is decremented.
.Pp
.Fn devstat_start_transaction
registers the start of a transaction with the
.Nm
subsystem.
Optionally, if the caller already has a
.Fn binuptime
value available, it may be passed in
.Fa *now .
Usually the caller can just pass
.Dv NULL
for
.Fa now ,
and the routine will gather the current
.Fn binuptime
itself.
The busy count is incremented with each transaction start.
When a device goes from idle to busy, the system uptime is recorded in the
.Va busy_from
field of the
.Va devstat
structure.
.Pp
.Fn devstat_start_transaction_bio
records the
.Fn binuptime
in the provided bio's
.Fa bio_t0
and then invokes
.Fn devstat_start_transaction .
.Pp
.Fn devstat_end_transaction
registers the end of a transaction with the
.Nm
subsystem.
It takes six arguments:
.Bl -tag -width tag_type
.It ds
The
.Va devstat
structure for the device in question.
.It bytes
The number of bytes transferred in this transaction.
.It tag_type
Transaction tag type.
See below for tag types.
.It flags
Transaction flags indicating whether the transaction was a read, write, or
whether no data was transferred.
.It now
The
.Fn binuptime
at the end of the transaction, or
.Dv NULL .
.It then
The
.Fn binuptime
at the beginning of the transaction, or
.Dv NULL .
.El
.Pp
If
.Fa now
is
.Dv NULL ,
it collects the current time from
.Fn binuptime .
If
.Fa then
is
.Dv NULL ,
the operation is not tracked in the
.Va devstat
.Fa duration
table.
.Pp
.Fn devstat_end_transaction_bio
is a thin wrapper for
.Fn devstat_end_transaction_bio_bt
with a
.Dv NULL
.Fa now
parameter.
.Pp
.Fn devstat_end_transaction_bio_bt
is a wrapper for
.Fn devstat_end_transaction
which pulls all needed information from a
.Va "struct bio"
prepared by
.Fn devstat_start_transaction_bio .
The bio must be ready for
.Fn biodone
(i.e.,
.Fa bio_bcount
and
.Fa bio_resid
must be correctly initialized).
.Pp
The
.Va devstat
structure is composed of the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width dev_creation_time
.It sequence0 ,
.It sequence1
An implementation detail used to gather consistent snapshots of device
statistics.
.It start_count
Number of operations started.
.It end_count
Number of operations completed.
The
.Dq busy_count
can be calculated by subtracting
.Fa end_count
from
.Fa start_count .
.Fa ( sequence0
and
.Fa sequence1
are used to get a consistent snapshot.)
This is the current number of outstanding transactions for the device.
This should never go below zero, and on an idle device it should be zero.
If either one of these conditions is not true, it indicates a problem.
.Pp
There should be one and only one
transaction start event and one transaction end event for each transaction.
.It dev_links
Each
.Va devstat
structure is placed in a linked list when it is registered.
The
.Va dev_links
field contains a pointer to the next entry in the list of
.Va devstat
structures.
.It device_number
The device number is a unique identifier for each device.
The device
number is incremented for each new device that is registered.
The device
number is currently only a 32-bit integer, but it could be enlarged if
someone has a system with more than four billion device arrival events.
.It device_name
The device name is a text string given by the registering driver to
identify itself.
(e.g.,
.Dq da ,
.Dq cd ,
.Dq sa ,
etc.)
.It unit_number
The unit number identifies the particular instance of the peripheral driver
in question.
.It bytes[4]
This array contains the number of bytes that have been read (index
.Dv DEVSTAT_READ ) ,
written (index
.Dv DEVSTAT_WRITE ) ,
freed or erased (index
.Dv DEVSTAT_FREE ) ,
or other (index
.Dv DEVSTAT_NO_DATA ) .
All values are unsigned 64-bit integers.
.It operations[4]
This array contains the number of operations of a given type that have been
performed.
The indices are identical to those for
.Fa bytes
above.
.Dv DEVSTAT_NO_DATA
or "other" represents the number of transactions to the device which are
neither reads, writes, nor frees.
For instance,
.Tn SCSI
drivers often send a test unit ready command to
.Tn SCSI
devices.
The test unit ready command does not read or write any data.
It merely causes the device to return its status.
.It duration[4]
This array contains the total bintime corresponding to completed operations of
a given type.
The indices are identical to those for
.Fa bytes
above.
(Operations that complete using the historical
.Fn devstat_end_transaction
API and do not provide a non-NULL
.Fa then
are not accounted for.)
.It busy_time
This is the amount of time that the device busy count has been greater than
zero.
This is only updated when the busy count returns to zero.
.It creation_time
This is the time, as reported by
.Fn getmicrotime
that the device was registered.
.It block_size
This is the block size of the device, if the device has a block size.
.It tag_types
This is an array of counters to record the number of various tag types that
are sent to a device.
See below for a list of tag types.
.It busy_from
If the device is not busy, this was the time that a transaction last completed.
If the device is busy, this the most recent of either the time that the device
became busy, or the time that the last transaction completed.
.It flags
These flags indicate which statistics measurements are supported by a
particular device.
These flags are primarily intended to serve as an aid
to userland programs that decipher the statistics.
.It device_type
This is the device type.
It consists of three parts: the device type
(e.g., direct access, CDROM, sequential access, etc.), the interface (IDE,
SCSI or other) and whether or not the device in question is a pass-through
driver.
See below for a complete list of device types.
.It priority
This is the priority.
This is the first parameter used to determine where
to insert a device in the
.Nm
list.
The second parameter is attach order.
See below for a list of available priorities.
.El
.Pp
Each device is given a device type.
Pass-through devices have the same underlying device type and interface as the
device they provide an interface for, but they also have the pass-through flag
set.
The base device types are identical to the
.Tn SCSI
device type numbers, so with
.Tn SCSI
peripherals, the device type returned from an inquiry is usually ORed with the
.Tn SCSI
interface type and the pass-through flag if appropriate.
The device type
flags are as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef enum {
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_DIRECT	= 0x000,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_SEQUENTIAL	= 0x001,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_PRINTER	= 0x002,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_PROCESSOR	= 0x003,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_WORM	= 0x004,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_CDROM	= 0x005,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_SCANNER	= 0x006,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_OPTICAL	= 0x007,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_CHANGER	= 0x008,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_COMM	= 0x009,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_ASC0	= 0x00a,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_ASC1	= 0x00b,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_STORARRAY	= 0x00c,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_ENCLOSURE	= 0x00d,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_FLOPPY	= 0x00e,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_MASK	= 0x00f,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_IF_SCSI	= 0x010,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_IF_IDE	= 0x020,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_IF_OTHER	= 0x030,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_IF_MASK	= 0x0f0,
	DEVSTAT_TYPE_PASS	= 0x100
} devstat_type_flags;
.Ed
.Pp
Devices have a priority associated with them, which controls roughly where
they are placed in the
.Nm
list.
The priorities are as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef enum {
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_MIN	= 0x000,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_OTHER	= 0x020,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_PASS	= 0x030,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_FD	= 0x040,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_WFD	= 0x050,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_TAPE	= 0x060,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_CD	= 0x090,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_DISK	= 0x110,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_ARRAY	= 0x120,
	DEVSTAT_PRIORITY_MAX	= 0xfff
} devstat_priority;
.Ed
.Pp
Each device has associated with it flags to indicate what operations are
supported or not supported.
The
.Va devstat_support_flags
values are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width DEVSTAT_NO_ORDERED_TAGS
.It DEVSTAT_ALL_SUPPORTED
Every statistic type is supported by the device.
.It DEVSTAT_NO_BLOCKSIZE
This device does not have a blocksize.
.It DEVSTAT_NO_ORDERED_TAGS
This device does not support ordered tags.
.It DEVSTAT_BS_UNAVAILABLE
This device supports a blocksize, but it is currently unavailable.
This
flag is most often used with removable media drives.
.El
.Pp
Transactions to a device fall into one of three categories, which are
represented in the
.Va flags
passed into
.Fn devstat_end_transaction .
The transaction types are as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef enum {
	DEVSTAT_NO_DATA	= 0x00,
	DEVSTAT_READ	= 0x01,
	DEVSTAT_WRITE	= 0x02,
	DEVSTAT_FREE	= 0x03
} devstat_trans_flags;
.Ed
.Pp
There are four possible values for the
.Va tag_type
argument to
.Fn devstat_end_transaction :
.Bl -tag -width DEVSTAT_TAG_ORDERED
.It DEVSTAT_TAG_SIMPLE
The transaction had a simple tag.
.It DEVSTAT_TAG_HEAD
The transaction had a head of queue tag.
.It DEVSTAT_TAG_ORDERED
The transaction had an ordered tag.
.It DEVSTAT_TAG_NONE
The device does not support tags.
.El
.Pp
The tag type values correspond to the lower four bits of the
.Tn SCSI
tag definitions.
In CAM, for instance, the
.Va tag_action
from the CCB is ORed with 0xf to determine the tag type to pass in to
.Fn devstat_end_transaction .
.Pp
There is a macro,
.Dv DEVSTAT_VERSION
that is defined in
.In sys/devicestat.h .
This is the current version of the
.Nm
subsystem, and it should be incremented each time a change is made that
would require recompilation of userland programs that access
.Nm
statistics.
Userland programs use this version, via the
.Va kern.devstat.version
.Nm sysctl
variable to determine whether they are in sync with the kernel
.Nm
structures.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr devstat 3 ,
.Xr iostat 8 ,
.Xr rpc.rstatd 8 ,
.Xr vmstat 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
statistics system appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Kenneth Merry Aq Mt ken@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
There may be a need for
.Fn spl
protection around some of the
.Nm
list manipulation code to ensure, for example, that the list of devices
is not changed while someone is fetching the
.Va kern.devstat.all
.Nm sysctl
variable.
