.\"	$OpenBSD: dohooks.9,v 1.8 2015/12/12 11:26:32 mpi Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Niklas Hallqvist.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 12 2015 $
.Dt DOHOOKS 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dohooks
.Nd run all hooks in a list
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/systm.h
.Ft void
.Fn dohooks "struct hook_desc_head *head" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn dohooks
function invokes all hooks established using the
.Xr hook_establish 9
function.
Hooks are called in the order of the TAILQ that
.Fa head
points to, however
.Xr hook_establish 9
can put the hooks either at the head or the tail of that queue,
making it possible to call the hooks either in the order of
establishment, or its reverse.
.Pp
The flags can specify
.Dv HOOK_REMOVE
to remove already processed hooks from the hook list and
.Dv HOOK_FREE
to also free them.
In most cases either no flags should be used or
.Dv HOOK_REMOVE
and
.Dv HOOK_FREE
at the same time, since just HOOK_REMOVE will drop the only reference to
allocated memory and should only be used in situations where freeing
memory would be illegal and unnecessary.
.Pp
This function is used to implement the
.Xr dostartuphooks 9
macro.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dostartuphooks 9 ,
.Xr hook_establish 9
