.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 5, 2018
.Dt DPCPU 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dpcpu
.Nd Kernel Dynamic Per-CPU Memory Allocator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/pcpu.h
.Ss Per-CPU Variable Definition and Declaration
.Fn DPCPU_DEFINE "type" "name"
.Fn DPCPU_DEFINE_STATIC "type" "name"
.Fn DPCPU_DECLARE "type" "name"
.Ss Current CPU Accessor Functions
.Fn DPCPU_PTR "name"
.Fn DPCPU_GET "name"
.Fn DPCPU_SET "name" "value"
.Ss Named CPU Accessor Functions
.Fn DPCPU_ID_PTR "cpu" "name"
.Fn DPCPU_ID_GET "cpu" "name"
.Fn DPCPU_ID_SET "cpu" "name" "value"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
instantiates one instance of a global variable with each CPU in the system.
Dynamically allocated per-CPU variables are defined using
.Fn DPCPU_DEFINE ,
which defines a variable of name
.Ar name
and type
.Ar type .
Arbitrary C types may be used, including structures and arrays.
If no initialization is provided, then each per-CPU instance of the variable
will be zero-filled (i.e., as though allocated in BSS):
.Bd -literal -offset 1234
DPCPU_DEFINE(int, foo_int);
.Ed
.Pp
Values may also be initialized statically with the definition, causing each
per-CPU instance to be initialized with the value:
.Bd -literal -offset 1234
DPCPU_DEFINE(int, foo_int) = 1;
.Ed
.Pp
Values that can be defined as
.Dv static
must use
.Fn DPCPU_DEFINE_STATIC :
.Bd -literal -offset 1234
DPCPU_DEFINE_STATIC(int, foo_int);
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn DPCPU_DECLARE
produces a declaration of the per-CPU variable suitable for use in header
files.
.Pp
The current CPU's variable instance can be accessed via
.Nm DPCPU_PTR
(which returns a pointer to the per-CPU instance),
.Nm DPCPU_GET
(which retrieves the value of the per-CPU instance),
and
.Nm DPCPU_SET
(which sets the value of the per-CPU instance).
.Pp
Instances of variables associated with specific CPUs can be accessed via the
.Nm DPCPU_ID_PTR ,
.Nm DPCPU_ID_GET ,
and
.Nm DPGPU_ID_SET
accessor functions, which accept an additional CPU ID argument,
.Ar cpu .
.Ss Synchronization
In addition to the ordinary synchronization concerns associated with global
variables, which may imply the use of
.Xr atomic 9 ,
.Xr mutex 9 ,
or other kernel synchronization primitives, it is further the case that
thread migration could dynamically change the instance of a variable being
accessed by a thread between operations.
This requires additional care when reasoning about and protecting per-CPU
variables.
.Pp
For example, it may be desirable to protect access using
.Xr critical_section 9
to prevent both preemption and migration during use.
Alternatively, it may be desirable to cache the CPU ID at the start of a
sequence of accesses, using suitable synchronization to make non-atomic
sequences safe in the presence of migration.
.Bd -literal -offset 1234
DPCPU_DEFINE_STATIC(int, foo_int);
DPCPU_DEFINE_STATIC(struct mutex, foo_lock);

void
foo_int_increment(void)
{
    int cpu, value;

    /* Safe as atomic access. */
    atomic_add_int(DPCPU_PTR(foo_int), 1);

    /*
     * Protect with a critical section, which prevents preemption
     * and migration.  However, access to instances from remote CPUs
     * is not safe, as critical sections prevent concurrent access
     * only from the current CPU.
     */
    critical_enter();
    value = DPCPU_GET(foo_int);
    value++;
    DPCPU_SET(foo_int, value);
    critical_exit();

    /*
     * Protect with a per-CPU mutex, tolerating migration, but
     * potentially accessing the variable from multiple CPUs if
     * migration occurs after reading curcpu.  Remote access to a
     * per-CPU variable is safe as long as the correct mutex is
     * acquired.
     */
    cpu = curcpu;
    mtx_lock(DPCPU_ID_PTR(cpu, foo_lock));
    value = DPCPU_ID_GET(cpu, foo_int);
    value++;
    DPCPU_ID_SET(cpu, foo_int);
    mtx_unlock(DPCPU_ID_PTR(cpu, foo_lock));
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr atomic 9 ,
.Xr critical_enter 9 ,
.Xr mutex 9
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was first introduced by
.An Jeff Roberson
in
.Fx 8.0 .
This manual page was written by
.An Robert N. M. Watson.
