.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Alexander Langer
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 12, 2018
.Dt DRIVER_MODULE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm DRIVER_MODULE ,
.Nm DRIVER_MODULE_ORDERED ,
.Nm EARLY_DRIVER_MODULE ,
.Nm EARLY_DRIVER_MODULE_ORDERED
.Nd kernel driver declaration macro
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/kernel.h
.In sys/bus.h
.In sys/module.h
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE name busname "driver_t driver" "devclass_t devclass" "modeventhand_t evh" "void *arg"
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE_ORDERED name busname "driver_t driver" "devclass_t devclass" "modeventhand_t evh" "void *arg" "int order"
.Fn EARLY_DRIVER_MODULE name busname "driver_t driver" "devclass_t devclass" "modeventhand_t evh" "void *arg" "enum sysinit_elem_order order" "int pass"
.Fn EARLY_DRIVER_MODULE_ORDERED name busname "driver_t driver" "devclass_t devclass" "modeventhand_t evh" "void *arg" "enum sysinit_elem_order order" "int pass"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE
macro declares a kernel driver.
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE
expands to the real driver declaration, where the phrase
.Fa name
is used as the naming prefix for the driver and its functions.
Note that it is supplied as plain text, and not a
.Li char
or
.Li char * .
.Pp
.Fa busname
is the parent bus of the driver (PCI, ISA, PPBUS and others), e.g.\&
.Ql pci ,
.Ql isa ,
or
.Ql ppbus .
.Pp
The identifier used in
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE
can be different from the driver name.
Also, the same driver identifier can exist on different buses,
which is a pretty clean way of making front ends for different cards
using the same driver on the same or different buses.
For example, the following is allowed:
.Pp
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE foo isa foo_driver foo_devclass NULL NULL ;
.Pp
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE foo pci foo_driver foo_devclass NULL NULL ;
.Pp
.Fa driver
is the driver of type
.Li driver_t ,
which contains the information about the driver and is therefore one of the
two most important parts of the call to
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE .
.Pp
The
.Fa devclass
argument contains the kernel-internal information about the device,
which will be used within the kernel driver module.
.Pp
The
.Fa evh
argument is the event handler which is called when the driver (or module)
is loaded or unloaded (see
.Xr module 9 ) .
.Pp
The
.Fa arg
is unused at this time and should be a
.Dv NULL
pointer.
.Pp
The
.Fn DRIVER_MODULE_ORDERED
macro allows a driver to be registered in a specific order.
This can be useful if a single kernel module contains multiple drivers
that are inter-dependent.
The
.Fa order
argument should be one of the
.Xr SYSINIT 9
initialization ordering constants
.Pq Dv SI_ORDER_* .
The default order for a driver module is
.Dv SI_ORDER_MIDDLE .
Typically a module will specify an order of
.Dv SI_ORDER_ANY
for a single driver to ensure it is registered last.
.Pp
The
.Fn EARLY_DRIVER_MODULE
macro allows a driver to be registered for a specific pass level.
The boot time probe and attach process makes multiple passes over the
device tree.
Certain critical drivers that provide basic services needed by other
devices are attach during earlier passes.
Most drivers are attached in a final general pass.
A driver that attaches during an early pass must register for a specific
pass level
.Pq BUS_PASS_*
via the
.Fa pass
argument.
Once a driver is registered it is available to attach to devices for
all subsequent passes.
.Pp
The
.Fn EARLY_DRIVER_MODULE_ORDERED
macro allows a driver to be registered both in a specific order and
for a specific pass level.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9 ,
.Xr module 9 ,
.Xr MODULE_PNP_INFO 9 ,
.Xr SYSINIT 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alexander Langer Aq Mt alex@FreeBSD.org .
