.\"	$NetBSD: fetch.9,v 1.2 1996/01/09 21:59:24 perry Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Jason R. Thorpe.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed by Kenneth Stailey.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed for the NetBSD Project
.\"	by Jason R. Thorpe.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 17, 2018
.Dt FETCH 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fetch ,
.Nm fubyte ,
.Nm fuword ,
.Nm fuword16 ,
.Nm fuword32 ,
.Nm fuword64 ,
.Nm fueword ,
.Nm fueword32 ,
.Nm fueword64
.Nd fetch data from user-space
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/systm.h
.Ft int
.Fn fubyte "volatile const void *base"
.Ft long
.Fn fuword "volatile const void *base"
.Ft int
.Fn fuword16 "volatile const void *base"
.Ft int32_t
.Fn fuword32 "volatile const void *base"
.Ft int64_t
.Fn fuword64 "volatile const void *base"
.Ft long
.Fn fueword "volatile const void *base" "long *val"
.Ft int32_t
.Fn fueword32 "volatile const void *base" "int32_t *val"
.Ft int64_t
.Fn fueword64 "volatile const void *base" "int64_t *val"
.In sys/resourcevar.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
functions are designed to copy small amounts of data from user-space
of the current process.
If read is successful, it is performed atomically.
The data read must be naturally aligned.
.Pp
The
.Nm
routines provide the following functionality:
.Bl -tag -width "fueword32()"
.It Fn fubyte
Fetches a byte of data from the user-space address
.Pa base .
The byte read is zero-extended into the results variable.
.It Fn fuword
Fetches a word of data (long) from the user-space address
.Pa base .
.It Fn fuword16
Fetches 16 bits of data from the user-space address
.Pa base .
The half-word read is zero-extended into the results variable.
.It Fn fuword32
Fetches 32 bits of data from the user-space address
.Pa base .
.It Fn fuword64
Fetches 64 bits of data from the user-space address
.Pa base .
.It Fn fueword
Fetches a word of data (long) from the user-space address
.Pa base
and stores the result in the variable pointed by
.Pa val .
.It Fn fueword32
Fetches 32 bits of data from the user-space address
.Pa base
and stores the result in the variable pointed by
.Pa val .
.It Fn fueword64
Fetches 64 bits of data from the user-space address
.Pa base
and stores the result in the variable pointed by
.Pa val .
.El
.Pp
The callers of
.Fn fuword ,
.Fn fuword32
and
.Fn fuword64
functions cannot distinguish between -1 read from
userspace and function failure.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn fubyte ,
.Fn fuword ,
.Fn fuword16 ,
.Fn fuword32 ,
and
.Fn fuword64
functions return the data fetched or -1 on failure.
The
.Fn fueword ,
.Fn fueword32
and
.Fn fueword64
functions return 0 on success and -1 on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr copy 9 ,
.Xr store 9
