.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Max Laier <mlaier@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 14, 2019
.Dt FIRMWARE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm firmware_register ,
.Nm firmware_unregister ,
.Nm firmware_get ,
.Nm firmware_put
.Nd firmware image loading and management
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/systm.h
.In sys/linker.h
.In sys/firmware.h
.Bd -literal
struct firmware {
	const char	*name;		/* system-wide name */
	const void	*data;		/* location of image */
	size_t		datasize;	/* size of image in bytes */
	unsigned int	version;	/* version of the image */
};
.Ed
.Ft "const struct firmware *"
.Fo firmware_register
.Fa "const char *imagename"
.Fa "const void *data"
.Fa "size_t datasize"
.Fa "unsigned int version"
.Fa "const struct firmware *parent"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn firmware_unregister "const char *imagename"
.Ft "const struct firmware *"
.Fn firmware_get "const char *imagename"
.Ft void
.Fn firmware_put "const struct firmware *fp" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm firmware
abstraction provides a convenient interface for loading
.Nm firmware images
into the kernel, and for accessing such images from kernel components.
.Pp
A
.Nm firmware image
(or
.Nm image
for brevity)
is an opaque block of data residing in kernel memory.
It is associated to a unique
.Nm imagename
which constitutes a search key, and to an integer
.Nm version
number, which is also an opaque piece of information for the
firmware subsystem.
.Pp
An image is registered with the
.Nm firmware
subsystem by calling the function
.Fn firmware_register ,
and unregistered by calling
.Fn firmware_unregister .
These functions are usually (but not exclusively) called by
specially crafted kernel modules that contain the firmware image.
The modules can be statically compiled in the kernel, or loaded by
.Nm /boot/loader ,
manually at runtime, or on demand by the firmware subsystem.
.Pp
.Nm Clients
of the firmware subsystem can request access to a given image
by calling the function
.Fn firmware_get
with the
.Nm imagename
they want as an argument.
If a matching image is not already registered,
the firmware subsystem will try to load it using the
mechanisms specified below (typically, a kernel module
with
.Nm
the same name
as the image).
.Sh API DESCRIPTION
The kernel
.Nm
firmware API
is made of the following functions:
.Pp
.Fn firmware_register
registers with the kernel an image of size
.Nm datasize
located at address
.Nm data ,
under the name
.Nm imagename .
.Pp
The function returns NULL on error (e.g. because an
image with the same name already exists, or the image
table is full), or a
.Ft const struct firmware *
pointer to the image requested.
.Pp
.Fn firmware_unregister
tries to unregister the firmware image
.Nm imagename
from the system.
The function is successful and returns 0
if there are no pending references to the image, otherwise
it does not unregister the image and returns EBUSY.
.Pp
.Fn firmware_get
returns the requested firmware image.
If the image is not yet registered with the system,
the function tries to load it.
This involves the linker subsystem and disk access, so
.Fn firmware_get
must not be called with any locks (except for
.Va Giant ) .
Note also that if the firmware image is loaded from a filesystem
it must already be mounted.
In particular this means that it may be necessary to defer requests
from a driver attach method unless it is known the root filesystem is
already mounted.
.Pp
On success,
.Fn firmware_get
returns a pointer to the image description and increases the reference count
for this image.
On failure, the function returns NULL.
.Pp
.Fn firmware_put
drops a reference to a firmware image.
The
.Fa flags
argument may be set to
.Dv FIRMWARE_UNLOAD
to indicate that
firmware_put is free to reclaim resources associated with
the firmware image if this is the last reference.
By default a firmware image will be deferred to a
.Xr taskqueue 9
thread so the call may be done while holding a lock.
In certain cases, such as on driver detach, this cannot be allowed.
.Sh FIRMWARE LOADING MECHANISMS
As mentioned before, any component of the system can register
firmware images at any time by simply calling
.Fn firmware_register .
.Pp
This is typically done when a module containing
a firmware image is given control,
whether compiled in, or preloaded by
.Nm /boot/loader ,
or manually loaded with
.Xr kldload 8 .
However, a system can implement additional mechanisms to bring
these images in memory before calling
.Fn firmware_register .
.Pp
When
.Fn firmware_get
does not find the requested image, it tries to load it using
one of the available loading mechanisms.
At the moment, there is only one, namely
.Nm Loadable kernel modules :
.Pp
A firmware image named
.Nm foo
is looked up by trying to load the module named
.Nm foo.ko ,
using the facilities described in
.Xr kld 4 .
In particular, images are looked up in the directories specified
by the sysctl variable
.Nm kern.module_path
which on most systems defaults to
.Nm /boot/kernel;/boot/modules .
.Pp
Note that in case a module contains multiple images,
the caller should first request a
.Fn firmware_get
for the first image contained in the module, followed by requests
for the other images.
.Sh BUILDING FIRMWARE LOADABLE MODULES
A firmware module is built by embedding the
.Nm firmware image
into a suitable loadable kernel module that calls
.Fn firmware_register
on loading, and
.Fn firmware_unregister
on unloading.
.Pp
Various system scripts and makefiles let you build a module
by simply writing a Makefile with the following entries:
.Bd -literal

        KMOD=   imagename
        FIRMWS= image_file:imagename[:version]
        .include <bsd.kmod.mk>

.Ed
where KMOD is the basename of the module; FIRMWS is a list of
colon-separated tuples indicating the image_file's to be embedded
in the module, the imagename and version of each firmware image.
.Pp
If you need to embed firmware images into a system, you should write
appropriate entries in the <files.arch> file, e.g. this example is
from
.Nm sys/arm/xscale/ixp425/files.ixp425 :
.Bd -literal
ixp425_npe_fw.c                         optional npe_fw                 \\
        compile-with    "${AWK} -f $S/tools/fw_stub.awk			\\
			IxNpeMicrocode.dat:npe_fw -mnpe -c${.TARGET}"	\\
        no-implicit-rule before-depend local                            \\
        clean           "ixp425_npe_fw.c"
#
# NB: ld encodes the path in the binary symbols generated for the
#     firmware image so link the file to the object directory to
#     get known values for reference in the _fw.c file.
#
IxNpeMicrocode.fwo  optional npe_fw					\\
        dependency      "IxNpeMicrocode.dat"				\\
        compile-with    "${LD} -b binary -d -warn-common		\\
			    -r -d -o ${.TARGET} IxNpeMicrocode.dat"	\\
        no-implicit-rule                                                \\
        clean           "IxNpeMicrocode.fwo"
.Ed
.Pp
Firmware was previously committed to the source tree as uuencoded files,
but this is no longer required; the binary firmware file should be committed
to the tree as provided by the vendor.
.Pp
Note that generating the firmware modules in this way requires
the availability of the following tools:
.Xr awk 1 ,
.Xr make 1 ,
the compiler and the linker.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kld 4 ,
.Xr module 9
.Pp
.Pa /usr/share/examples/kld/firmware
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm firmware
system was introduced in
.Fx 6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Max Laier Aq Mt mlaier@FreeBSD.org .
