.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Pawel Jakub Dawidek <pjd@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 16, 2004
.Dt G_EVENT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm g_post_event ,
.Nm g_waitfor_event ,
.Nm g_cancel_event
.Nd "GEOM events management"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In geom/geom.h
.Ft int
.Fn g_post_event "g_event_t *func" "void *arg" "int flag" ...
.Ft int
.Fn g_waitfor_event "g_event_t *func" "void *arg" "int flag" ...
.Ft void
.Fn g_cancel_event "void *ref"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The GEOM framework has its own event queue to inform classes about important
events.
The event queue can be also used by GEOM classes themselves, for example
to work around some restrictions in the I/O path, where sleeping, heavy weight
tasks, etc.\& are not permitted.
.Pp
The
.Fn g_post_event
function tells the GEOM framework to call function
.Fa func
with argument
.Fa arg
from the event queue.
The
.Fa flag
argument is passed to
.Xr malloc 9
for memory allocations inside of
.Fn g_post_event .
The only allowed flags are
.Dv M_WAITOK
and
.Dv M_NOWAIT .
The rest of the arguments are used as references to identify the event.
An event can be canceled by using any of the given references as an
argument to
.Fn g_cancel_event .
The list of references has to end with a
.Dv NULL
value.
.Pp
The
.Fn g_waitfor_event
function is a blocking version of the
.Fn g_post_event
function.
It waits until the event is finished or canceled and then returns.
.Pp
The
.Fn g_cancel_event
function cancels all event(s) identified by
.Fa ref .
Cancellation is equivalent to calling the requested function
with requested arguments and argument
.Fa flag
set to
.Dv EV_CANCEL .
.Sh RESTRICTIONS/CONDITIONS
.Fn g_post_event :
.Bl -item -offset indent
.It
The argument
.Fa flag
has to be
.Dv M_WAITOK
or
.Dv M_NOWAIT .
.It
The list of references has to end with a
.Dv NULL
value.
.El
.Pp
.Fn g_waitfor_event :
.Bl -item -offset indent
.It
The argument
.Fa flag
has to be
.Dv M_WAITOK
or
.Dv M_NOWAIT .
.It
The list of references has to end with a
.Dv NULL
value.
.It
The
.Fn g_waitfor_event
function cannot be called from an event, since doing so would result
in a deadlock.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn g_post_event
and
.Fn g_waitfor_event
functions
return 0 if successful; otherwise an error code is returned.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Example of a function called from the event queue.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void
example_event(void *arg, int flag)
{

	if (flag == EV_CANCEL) {
		printf("Event with argument %p canceled.\\n", arg);
		return;
	}

	printf("Event with argument %p called.\\n", arg);
}
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
Possible errors for the
.Fn g_post_event
function:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
The
.Fa flag
argument was set to
.Dv M_NOWAIT
and there was insufficient memory.
.El
.Pp
Possible errors for the
.Fn g_waitfor_event
function:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
The event was canceled.
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
The
.Fa flag
argument was set to
.Dv M_NOWAIT
and there was insufficient memory.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr geom 4 ,
.Xr DECLARE_GEOM_CLASS 9 ,
.Xr g_access 9 ,
.Xr g_attach 9 ,
.Xr g_bio 9 ,
.Xr g_consumer 9 ,
.Xr g_data 9 ,
.Xr g_geom 9 ,
.Xr g_provider 9 ,
.Xr g_provider_by_name 9 ,
.Xr g_wither_geom 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Pawel Jakub Dawidek Aq Mt pjd@FreeBSD.org .
