.\"     $OpenBSD: getdevvp.9,v 1.10 2025/09/20 13:56:15 mpi Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Peter A. Werner. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 20 2025 $
.Dt GETDEVVP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm getdevvp ,
.Nm bdevvp ,
.Nm cdevvp
.Nd create a vnode for a device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn getdevvp "dev_t dev" "struct vnode **vpp" "enum vtype type"
.Ft int
.Fn bdevvp "dev_t dev" "struct vnode **vpp"
.Ft int
.Fn cdevvp "dev_t dev" "struct vnode **vpp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getdevvp
function creates a vnode for a device of type
.Fa type
with a device number of
.Fa dev ,
and returns a pointer to it in
.Fa vpp .
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width "rootrefs"
.It Fa dev
The device number of the desired device.
.It Fa vpp
Where the vnode will be returned on success.
.It Fa type
The type of device, either:
.Bl -tag -width "VBLK"
.It Dv VBLK
For a block device, or
.It Dv VCHR
for a character device.
.El
.El
.Pp
.Fn bdevvp
and
.Fn cdevvp
use getdevvp internally, specifying the third argument.
.Fn bdevvp
will create a vnode for a block device, and is used for the root file system
and swap areas, among other things.
.Fn cdevvp
will create a vnode for a character device and is used in console handling.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
All functions return 0 on success.
If an error occurs, vpp will point to
.Dv NULL .
See
.Xr getnewvnode 9
for further return values.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getnewvnode 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9
