.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 4, 2009
.Dt IEEE80211_DDB 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ieee80211_ddb
.Nd 802.11 ddb support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Bd -ragged
.Cd options DDB
.Ed
.Bd -ragged
.Cd show vap [addr]
.Cd show all vaps
.Cd show com [addr]
.Cd show sta [addr]
.Cd show statab [addr]
.Cd show mesh [addr]
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm net80211
layer includes
.Xr ddb 4
support for displaying important data structures.
This is especially important because wireless applications are often
built for embedded environments where cross-machine or post-mortem
debugging facilities like
.Xr kgdb 1
are infeasible.
.Pp
The most commonly used command is
.Bd -literal -offset indent
show all vaps/a
.Ed
.Pp
which dumps the contents of all
.Vt ieee80211vap ,
.Vt ieee80211com ,
and
.Vt ieee80211_node
data structures in the system.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ddb 4 ,
.Xr ieee80211 9
