.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 4, 2009
.Dt IEEE8021_VAP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm net80211_vap
.Nd 802.11 network layer virtual radio support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In net80211/ieee80211_var.h
.Ft int
.Fo ieee80211_vap_setup
.Fa "struct ieee80211com *"
.Fa "struct ieee80211vap *"
.Fa "const char name[IFNAMSIZ]"
.Fa "int unit"
.Fa "int opmode"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fa "const uint8_t bssid[IEEE80211_ADDR_LEN]"
.Fa "const uint8_t macaddr[IEEE80211_ADDR_LEN]"
.Fc
.\"
.Ft int
.Fo ieee80211_vap_attach
.Fa "struct ieee80211vap *"
.Fa "ifm_change_cb_t media_change"
.Fa "ifm_stat_cb_t media_stat"
.Fc
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn ieee80211_vap_detach "struct ieee80211vap *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm net80211
software layer provides a support framework for drivers that includes
a virtual radio API that is exported to
users through network interfaces (aka vaps) that are cloned from the
underlying device.
These interfaces have an operating mode
(station, adhoc, hostap, wds, monitor, etc.\&)
that is fixed for the lifetime of the interface.
Devices that can support multiple concurrent interfaces allow
multiple vaps to be cloned.
.Pp
The virtual radio interface defined by the
.Nm net80211
layer means that drivers must be structured to follow specific rules.
Drivers that support only a single interface at any time must still
follow these rules.
.Pp
The virtual radio architecture splits state between a single per-device
.Vt ieee80211com
structure and one or more
.Vt ieee80211vap
structures.
Vaps are created with the
.Dv SIOCIFCREATE2
request.
This results in a call into the driver's
.Vt ic_vap_create
method where the driver can decide if the request should be accepted.
.Pp
The vap creation process is done in three steps.
First the driver allocates the data structure with
.Xr malloc 9 .
This data structure must have an
.Vt ieee80211vap
structure at the front but is usually extended with driver-private state.
Next the vap is setup with a call to
.Fn ieee80211_vap_setup .
This request initializes
.Nm net80211
state but does not activate the interface.
The driver can then override methods setup by
.Nm net80211
and setup driver resources before finally calling
.Fn ieee80211_vap_attach
to complete the process.
Both these calls must be done without holding any driver locks as
work may require the process block/sleep.
.Pp
A vap is deleted when an
.Dv SIOCIFDESTROY
ioctl request is made or when the device detaches (causing all
associated vaps to automatically be deleted).
Delete requests cause the
.Vt ic_vap_delete
method to be called.
Drivers must quiesce the device before calling
.Fn ieee80211_vap_detach
to deactivate the vap and isolate it from activities such as requests
from user applications.
The driver can then reclaim resources held by the vap and re-enable
device operation.
The exact procedure for quiescing a device is unspecified but typically
it involves blocking interrupts and stopping transmit and receive
processing.
.Sh MULTI-VAP OPERATION
Drivers are responsible for deciding if multiple vaps can be created
and how to manage them.
Whether or not multiple concurrent vaps can be supported depends on a
device's capabilities.
For example, multiple hostap vaps can usually be supported but many
devices do not support assigning each vap a unique BSSID.
If a device supports hostap operation it can usually support concurrent
station mode vaps but possibly with limitations such as losing support
for hardware beacon miss support.
Devices that are capable of hostap operation and can send and receive
4-address frames should be able to support WDS vaps together with an
ap vap.
But in contrast some devices cannot support WDS vaps without at least one
ap vap (this however can be finessed by forcing the ap vap to not transmit
beacon frames).
All devices should support the creation of any number of monitor mode vaps
concurrent with other vaps but it is the responsibility of the driver to
allow this.
.Pp
An important consequence of supporting multiple concurrent vaps is that
a driver's
.Vt iv_newstate
method must be written to handle being called for each vap.
Where necessary, drivers must track private state for all vaps
and not just the one whose state is being changed (e.g. for
handling beacon timers the driver may need to know if all vaps
that beacon are stopped before stopping the hardware timers).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ieee80211 9 ,
.Xr ifnet 9 ,
.Xr malloc 9
