.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004	Bruce M. Simpson <bms@spc.org>,
.\"			Darron Broad <darron@kewl.org>,
.\"			David Young <dyoung@pobox.com>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 11, 2019
.Dt IEEE80211_RADIOTAP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ieee80211_radiotap
.Nd 802.11 device packet capture support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In net80211/ieee80211_var.h
.\"
.Pp
.Ft void
.Fo ieee80211_radiotap_attach
.Fa "struct ieee80211com *"
.Fa "struct ieee80211_radiotap_header *th"
.Fa "int tlen"
.Fa "uint32_t tx_radiotap"
.Fa "struct ieee80211_radiotap_header *rh"
.Fa "int rlen"
.Fa "uint32_t rx_radiotap"
.Fc
.\"
.Ft int
.Fn ieee80211_radiotap_active_vap "struct ieee80211vap *"
.\"
.Ft int
.Fn ieee80211_radiotap_active "struct ieee80211com *"
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn ieee80211_radiotap_tx "struct ieee80211vap *" "struct mbuf *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm net80211
layer used by 802.11 drivers includes support for a device-independent
packet capture format called
.Nm radiotap
that is understood by tools such as
.Xr tcpdump 1 .
This facility is designed for capturing 802.11 traffic,
including information that is not part of the normal 802.11 frame structure.
.Pp
Radiotap was designed to balance the desire for a hardware-independent,
extensible capture format against the need to
conserve CPU and memory bandwidth on embedded systems.
These considerations led to a format consisting of
a standard preamble followed by an extensible bitmap indicating the
presence of optional capture fields.
A
.Nm net80211
device driver supporting
.Vt radiotap
defines two packed structures that it shares with
.Nm net80211 .
These structures embed an instance of a
.Vt ieee80211_radiotap_header
structure at the beginning,
with subsequent fields in the appropriate order,
and macros to set the bits of the
.Va it_present
bitmap to indicate which fields exist and are filled in by the driver.
This information is then supplied through the
.Fn ieee80211_radiotap_attach
call after a successful
.Fn ieee80211_ifattach
request.
.Pp
With radiotap setup, drivers just need to fill in per-packet
capture state for frames sent/received and dispatch capture state
in the transmit path (since control is not returned to the
.Nm net80211
layer before the packet is handed to the device).
To minimize overhead this work should be done only when one
or more processes are actively capturing data;
this is checked with one of
.Fn ieee80211_radiotap_active_vap
and
.Fn ieee80211_radiotap_active .
In the transmit path capture work looks like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if (ieee80211_radiotap_active_vap(vap)) {
	... /* record transmit state */
	ieee80211_radiotap_tx(vap, m); /* capture transmit event */
}
.Ed
.Pp
While in the receive path capture is handled in
.Nm net80211
but state must be captured before dispatching a frame:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if (ieee80211_radiotap_active(ic)) {
	... /* record receive state */
}
\&...
ieee80211_input(...);	/* packet capture handled in net80211 */
.Ed
.Pp
.\"
The following fields are defined for
.Vt radiotap ,
in the order in which they should appear in the buffer supplied
to
.Nm net80211 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_TSFT
This field contains the unsigned 64-bit value, in microseconds,
of the MAC's 802.11 Time Synchronization Function (TSF).
In theory, for each received frame, this value is recorded
when the first bit of the MPDU arrived at the MAC.
In practice, hardware snapshots the TSF otherwise and one cannot assume
this data is accurate without driver adjustment.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_FLAGS
This field contains a single unsigned 8-bit value, containing one or
more of these bit flags:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_CFP
Frame was sent/received during the Contention Free Period (CFP).
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_SHORTPRE
Frame was sent/received with short preamble.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_WEP
Frame was encrypted.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_FRAG
Frame was an 802.11 fragment.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_FCS
Frame contents includes the FCS.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_DATAPAD
Frame contents potentially has padding between the 802.11 header and the
data payload to align the payload to a 32-bit boundary.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_BADFCS
Frame was received with an invalid FCS.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_F_SHORTGI
Frame was sent/received with Short Guard Interval.
.El
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_RATE
This field contains a single unsigned 8-bit value that is the data rate.
Legacy rates are in units of 500Kbps.
MCS rates (used on 802.11n/HT channels) have the high bit set and
the MCS in the low 7 bits.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_CHANNEL
This field contains two unsigned 16-bit values.
The first value is the center frequency for the channel
the frame was sent/received on.
The second value is a bitmap containing flags that specify channel properties.
.Pp
This field is deprecated in favor of
.Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_XCHANNEL
but may be used to save space in the capture file for legacy devices.
.\".It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_FHSS
.\"This field contains two 8-bit values.
.\"This field should be present only for frequency-hopping radios.
.\"The first byte is the hop set.
.\"The second byte is the pattern in use.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DBM_ANTSIGNAL
This field contains a single signed 8-bit value that indicates the
RF signal power at the antenna, in decibels difference from 1mW.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DBM_ANTNOISE
This field contains a single signed 8-bit value that indicates the
RF noise power at the antenna, in decibels difference from 1mW.
.\".It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_LOCK_QUALITY
.\"This field contains a single unsigned 16-bit value, indicating the
.\"quality of the Barker Code lock.
.\"No unit is specified for this field.
.\"There does not appear to be a standard way of measuring this at this time;
.\"this quantity is often referred to as
.\".Dq "Signal Quality"
.\"in some datasheets.
.\".It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_TX_ATTENUATION
.\"This field contains a single unsigned 16-bit value, expressing transmit
.\"power as unitless distance from maximum power set at factory calibration.
.\"0 indicates maximum transmit power.
.\"Monotonically nondecreasing with lower power levels.
.\".It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DB_TX_ATTENUATION
.\"This field contains a single unsigned 16-bit value, expressing transmit
.\"power as decibel distance from maximum power set at factory calibration.
.\"0 indicates maximum transmit power.
.\"Monotonically nondecreasing with lower power levels.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DBM_TX_POWER
Transmit power expressed as decibels from a 1mW reference.
This field is a single signed 8-bit value.
This is the absolute power level measured at the antenna port.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_ANTENNA
This field contains a single unsigned 8-bit value that specifies
which antenna was used to transmit or receive the frame.
Antenna numbering is device-specific but typically the primary antenna has
the lowest number.
On transmit a value of zero may be seen which typically means
antenna selection is left to the device.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DB_ANTSIGNAL
This field contains a single unsigned 8-bit value that indicates the
RF signal power at the antenna, in decibels difference from an
arbitrary, fixed reference.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DB_ANTNOISE
This field contains a single unsigned 8-bit value that indicates the
RF noise power at the antenna, in decibels difference from an
arbitrary, fixed reference.
.It Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_XCHANNEL
This field contains four values: a 32-bit unsigned bitmap of
flags that describe the channel attributes, a 16-bit unsigned
frequency in MHz (typically the channel center), an 8-bit
unsigned IEEE channel number, and a signed 8-bit value that
holds the maximum regulatory transmit power cap in .5 dBm
(8 bytes total).
Channel flags are defined in:
.In net80211/_ieee80211.h
(only a subset are found in
.In net80211/ieee80211_radiotap.h ).
This property supersedes
.Dv IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_CHANNEL
and is the only way to completely express all
channel attributes and the
mapping between channel frequency and IEEE channel number.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Radiotap receive definitions for the Intersil Prism driver:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#define WI_RX_RADIOTAP_PRESENT \\
        ((1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_TSFT) \\
         (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_FLAGS) | \\
         (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_RATE) | \\
         (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_CHANNEL) | \\
         (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DB_ANTSIGNAL) | \\
         (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DB_ANTNOISE))

struct wi_rx_radiotap_header {
        struct ieee80211_radiotap_header wr_ihdr;
        uint64_t       wr_tsf;
        uint8_t        wr_flags;
        uint8_t        wr_rate;
        uint16_t       wr_chan_freq;
        uint16_t       wr_chan_flags;
        uint8_t        wr_antsignal;
        uint8_t        wr_antnoise;
} __packed __aligned(8);
.Ed
.Pp
and transmit definitions for the Atheros driver:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#define ATH_TX_RADIOTAP_PRESENT (               \\
        (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_FLAGS)         | \\
        (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_RATE)          | \\
        (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_DBM_TX_POWER)  | \\
        (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_ANTENNA)       | \\
        (1 << IEEE80211_RADIOTAP_XCHANNEL)      | \\
        0)

struct ath_tx_radiotap_header {
        struct ieee80211_radiotap_header wt_ihdr;
        uint8_t        wt_flags;
        uint8_t        wt_rate;
        uint8_t        wt_txpower;
        uint8_t        wt_antenna;
        uint32_t       wt_chan_flags;
        uint16_t       wt_chan_freq;
        uint8_t        wt_chan_ieee;
        int8_t         wt_chan_maxpow;
} __packed;
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tcpdump 1 ,
.Xr bpf 4 ,
.Xr ieee80211 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
definitions first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
.\"
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The original version of this manual page was written by
.An Bruce M. Simpson Aq Mt bms@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Darron Broad Aq Mt darron@kewl.org .
