.\" Copyright (C) 2008 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 8, 2008
.Dt INSMNTQUE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm insmntque ,
.Nm insmntque1
.Nd "associate a vnode with a mount"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn insmntque "struct vnode *vp" "struct mount *mp"
.Ft int
.Fn insmntque1 "struct vnode *vp" "struct mount *mp" "void (*dtr)(struct vnode *, void *)" "void *dtr_arg"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn insmntque
function associates a vnode with a mount.
This includes updating
.Va v_mount
for the vnode, and inserting the vnode into the mount's vnode list.
.Pp
The mount reference count is incremented for each vnode added to the
mount, and that reference is decremented by
.Xr vgone 9 .
.Pp
The mount's interlock is held while the vnode is inserted.
For MP-safe file systems, the vnode must be exclusively locked.
.Pp
On failure,
.Fn insmntque
calls
.Xr vgone 9
on the supplied vnode, and then drops the vnode lock and reference.
If more elaborated cleanup after
.Fn insmntque
failure is needed, the
.Fn insmntque1
function may be used instead.
The
.Fa dtr
argument is a pointer to a function that is called on failure.
This function may perform any custom cleanup.
The vnode pointer is supplied as the first argument to
.Fa dtr .
The
.Fa dtr_arg
argument is the second, supplying any additional context needed.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn insmntque
function will always return 0, unless the file system is currently being unmounted
in which case it may return
.Dv EBUSY .
Also,
.Fn insmntque
may be forced to insert the vnode into the mount's vnode list
by setting the
.Va VV_FORCEINSMQ
flag in the vnode
.Va v_flag ,
even if the file system is being unmounted.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vgone 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
