.\"	$OpenBSD: KASSERT.9,v 1.3 2025/06/13 18:34:00 schwarze Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2003 CubeSoft Communications, Inc.
.\" <http://www.csoft.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 13 2025 $
.Dt KASSERT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm assert ,
.Nm KASSERT ,
.Nm KDASSERT ,
.Nm KASSERTMSG ,
.Nm KDASSERTMSG ,
.Nm CTASSERT
.Nd kernel assert library routines
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/systm.h
.Ft void
.Fn assert "CONDITION"
.Ft void
.Fn KASSERT "CONDITION"
.Ft void
.Fn KDASSERT "CONDITION"
.Ft void
.Fn KASSERTMSG "CONDITION" "fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn KDASSERTMSG "CONDITION" "fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn CTASSERT "CONDITION"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
kernel
library implements a set of useful functions and macros implementing
expression verification.
.Pp
These macros cause kernel
.Xr panic 9
if the given condition evaluates to false.
.Fn assert
tests are always compiled in.
.Fn KASSERT
and
.Fn KASSERTMSG
tests are only included if the kernel has
.Dv DIAGNOSTIC
enabled.
.Fn KDASSERT
and
.Fn KDASSERTMSG
tests are only included if the kernel has
.Dv DEBUG
enabled.
The
.Fn KASSERTMSG
and
.Fn KDASSERTMSG
macros append
to the
.Xr panic 9
format string the message specified by
.Fa format
and its subsequent arguments, similar to
.Xr printf 9
functions.
.Pp
.Fn CTASSERT
causes a compile time error if the given condition evaluates to
false.
Its main purpose is to verify assertions about type and struct sizes that
would otherwise make the code fail at run time.
.Fn CTASSERT
can be used in global scope or at the start of blocks, where variable
declarations are allowed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr assert 3 ,
.Xr panic 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn KASSERTMSG
and
.Fn KDASSERTMSG
macros are taken from
.Nx .
