.\"	$OpenBSD: kcov_remote_register.9,v 1.6 2021/02/01 07:09:37 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Anton Lindqvist <anton@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: February 1 2021 $
.Dt KCOV_REMOTE_REGISTER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kcov_remote_register ,
.Nm kcov_remote_unregister ,
.Nm kcov_remote_enter ,
.Nm kcov_remote_leave
.Nd remote kernel code coverage collection interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/kcov.h
.Ft void
.Fn kcov_remote_register "int subsystem" "void *id"
.Ft void
.Fn kcov_remote_unregister "int subsystem" "void *id"
.Ft void
.Fn kcov_remote_enter "int subsystem" "void *id"
.Ft void
.Fn kcov_remote_leave "int subsystem" "void *id"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions provide an interface to collect code coverage from various
kernel subsystems using
.Xr kcov 4 .
The
.Fa subsystem
must be one of the following:
.Pp
.Dl #define KCOV_REMOTE_COMMON 0
.Pp
The
.Va id
must be a unique identifier for a resource tied to
.Va subsystem
that is known both by kernel and user space.
For instance, a network interface driver could form a subsystem using the
unique interface identifier as the
.Fa id .
.Pp
.Fn kcov_remote_register
registers a new instance of the given
.Fa subsystem .
Calling this function more than once with the same arguments is idempotent.
.Pp
.Fn kcov_remote_unregister
unregisters an existing instance of the given
.Fa subsystem ,
if present.
If one or many threads are currently within a remote section,
.Fn kcov_remote_unregister
will sleep until all the sections have been left.
.Pp
.Fn kcov_remote_enter
enters a remote section.
If the current thread has
.Xr kcov 4
enabled, code coverage will collected inside the remote section.
Remote sections may not be nested.
.Pp
.Fn kcov_remote_leave
leaves a remote section.
.Sh CONTEXT
.Fn kcov_remote_register
and
.Fn kcov_remote_unregister
can be called from process context.
.Fn kcov_remote_enter
and
.Fn kcov_remote_leave
can be called from interrupt and process context.
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
These functions are implemented in
.Pa sys/dev/kcov.c .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kcov 4
.Sh HISTORY
These functions first appeared in
.Ox 6.8 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Anton Lindqvist Aq Mt anton@openbsd.org
