.\"	$NetBSD: access.9,v 1.1 1996/06/16 10:38:35 pk Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Paul Kranenburg.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 16, 1996
.Dt KERNACC 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kernacc ,
.Nm useracc
.Nd check memory regions for accessibility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/proc.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_extern.h
.Ft int
.Fn kernacc "void *addr" "int len" "int rw"
.Ft int
.Fn useracc "void *addr" "int len" "int rw"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn kernacc
and
.Fn useracc
functions check whether operations of the type specified in
.Fa rw
are permitted in the range of virtual addresses given by
.Fa addr
and
.Fa len .
The possible values of
.Fa rw
are any bitwise combination of
.Dv VM_PROT_READ ,
.Dv VM_PROT_WRITE
and
.Dv VM_PROT_EXECUTE .
.Fn kernacc
checks addresses in the kernel address space, while
.Fn useracc
considers
.Fa addr
to represent an user space address.
The process context to use for this
operation is taken from the global variable
.Va curproc .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Both functions return boolean true if the type of access specified
by
.Fa rw
is permitted.
Otherwise boolean false is returned.
.Sh BUGS
The process pointer should be passed in as an argument to
.Fn useracc .
