.\"	$OpenBSD: lim_cur.9,v 1.2 2019/06/21 12:56:46 visa Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Visa Hankala
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: June 21 2019 $
.Dt LIM_CUR 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lim_cur ,
.Nm lim_cur_proc ,
.Nm lim_fork ,
.Nm lim_free ,
.Nm lim_read_enter ,
.Nm lim_read_leave
.Nd Resource limit interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/resourcevar.h
.Ft rlim_t
.Fn "lim_cur" "int which"
.Ft rlim_t
.Fn "lim_cur_proc" "struct proc *p" "int which"
.Ft struct plimit *
.Fn "lim_fork" "struct process *parent" "struct process *child"
.Ft void
.Fn "lim_free" "struct plimit *limit"
.Ft struct plimit *
.Fn "lim_read_enter"
.Ft void
.Fn "lim_read_leave" "struct plimit *limit"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The resource limit interface provides read access to the resource limits
of the process.
.Pp
.Fn lim_cur
returns the value of limit
.Fa which
of the current process.
The
.Fa which
can take one of the following values:
.Bd -literal
#define RLIMIT_CPU	0	/* cpu time in milliseconds */
#define RLIMIT_FSIZE	1	/* maximum file size */
#define RLIMIT_DATA	2	/* data size */
#define RLIMIT_STACK	3	/* stack size */
#define RLIMIT_CORE	4	/* core file size */
#define RLIMIT_RSS	5	/* resident set size */
#define RLIMIT_MEMLOCK	6	/* locked-in-memory address space */
#define RLIMIT_NPROC	7	/* number of processes */
#define RLIMIT_NOFILE	8	/* number of open files */
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn lim_cur_proc
is like
.Fn lim_cur
but returns the value of limit
.Fa which
of thread
.Fa p .
.Pp
.Fn lim_read_enter
begins read access to the current process' resource limit structure.
.Pp
.Fn lim_read_leave
finishes read access to the resource limit structure.
.Pp
Sections denoted by
.Fn lim_read_enter
and
.Fn lim_read_leave
cannot nest.
Using
.Fn lim_cur
inside the read section is not allowed
because the function uses
.Fn lim_read_enter
and
.Fn lim_read_leave
internally.
.Pp
.Fn lim_free
releases the reference
.Fa limit .
.Pp
.Fn lim_fork
makes the process
.Fa child
share the resource limits of process
.Fa parent .
.Sh CONTEXT
.Fn lim_cur ,
.Fn lim_cur_proc ,
.Fn lim_fork ,
.Fn lim_free ,
.Fn lim_read_enter
and
.Fn lim_read_leave
can be called during autoconf, or from process context.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn lim_cur
and
.Fn lim_cur_proc
return the value of the given resource limit.
.Pp
.Fn lim_read_enter
returns a read reference to the current process' resource limits.
