.\"	$OpenBSD: mbuf_tags.9,v 1.18 2003/12/08 07:07:35 mcbride Exp $
.\"
.\" The authors of this manual page are Angelos D. Keromytis
.\" (angelos@cis.upenn.edu), Gleb Smirnoff <glebius@FreeBSD.org>, and
.\" Robert Watson <rwatson@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Angelos D. Keromytis
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, and modify this software with or without
.\" fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice is included
.\" in all source code copies of any software which is or includes a copy
.\" or modification of this software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTY. IN PARTICULAR, NONE OF THE AUTHORS MAKES ANY
.\" REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE
.\" MERCHANTABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 12, 2008
.Dt MBUF_TAGS 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mbuf_tags
.Nd a framework for generic packet attributes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/mbuf.h
.Ft "struct m_tag *"
.Fn m_tag_alloc "uint32_t cookie" "int type" "int len" "int wait"
.Ft "struct m_tag *"
.Fn m_tag_copy "struct m_tag *t" "int how"
.Ft int
.Fn m_tag_copy_chain "struct mbuf *to" "const struct mbuf *from" "int how"
.Ft void
.Fn m_tag_delete "struct mbuf *m" "struct m_tag *t"
.Ft void
.Fn m_tag_delete_chain "struct mbuf *m" "struct m_tag *t"
.Ft void
.Fn m_tag_delete_nonpersistent "struct mbuf *m"
.Ft "struct m_tag *"
.Fn m_tag_find "struct mbuf *m" "int type" "struct m_tag *start"
.Ft "struct m_tag *"
.Fn m_tag_first "struct mbuf *m"
.Ft void
.Fn m_tag_free "struct m_tag *t"
.Ft "struct m_tag *"
.Fn m_tag_get "int type" "int len" "int wait"
.Ft void
.Fn m_tag_init "struct mbuf *m"
.Ft struct m_tag *
.Fn m_tag_locate "struct mbuf *m" "uint32_t cookie" "int type" "struct m_tag *t"
.Ft "struct m_tag *"
.Fn m_tag_next "struct mbuf *m" "struct m_tag *t"
.Ft void
.Fn m_tag_prepend "struct mbuf *m" "struct m_tag *t"
.Ft void
.Fn m_tag_unlink "struct mbuf *m" "struct m_tag *t"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Mbuf tags allow additional meta-data to be associated with in-flight packets
by providing a mechanism for the tagging of additional kernel memory onto
packet header mbufs.
Tags are maintained in chains off of the
.Xr mbuf 9
header, and maintained using a series of API calls to allocate, search, and
delete tags.
Tags are identified using an ID and cookie that uniquely identify a class
of data tagged onto the packet, and may contain an arbitrary amount of
additional storage.
Typical uses of mbuf tags include Mandatory Access Control (MAC) labels as
described in
.Xr mac 9 ,
IPsec policy information as described in
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
and packet filter tags used by
.Xr pf 4 .
.Pp
Tags will be maintained across a variety of operations, including the copying
of packet headers using facilities such as
.Fn M_COPY_PKTHDR
and
.Fn M_MOVE_PKTHDR .
Any tags associated with an mbuf header will be automatically freed when the
mbuf is freed, although some subsystems will wish to delete the tags prior
to that time.
.Pp
Packet tags are used by different kernel APIs
to keep track of operations done or
scheduled to happen to packets.
Each packet tag can be distinguished by its type and cookie.
The cookie is used to identify a specific module or API.
The packet tags are attached to mbuf packet headers.
.Pp
The first
.Fn sizeof "struct m_tag"
bytes of a tag contain a
.Vt "struct m_tag" :
.Bd -literal
struct m_tag {
	SLIST_ENTRY(m_tag)	m_tag_link;	/* List of packet tags */
	uint16_t		m_tag_id;	/* Tag ID */
	uint16_t		m_tag_len;	/* Length of data */
	uint32_t		m_tag_cookie;	/* ABI/Module ID */
	void			(*m_tag_free)(struct m_tag *);
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va m_tag_link
field is used to link tags together (see
.Xr queue 3
for more details).
The
.Va m_tag_id , m_tag_len
and
.Va m_tag_cookie
fields are set to type, length,
and
cookie, respectively.
.Va m_tag_free
points to
.Fn m_tag_free_default .
Following this structure are
.Va m_tag_len
bytes of space that can be used to store tag-specific information.
Addressing this data region may be tricky.
A safe way is embedding
.Vt "struct m_tag"
into a private data structure, as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct foo {
	struct m_tag	tag;
	...
};
struct foo *p = (struct foo *)m_tag_alloc(...);
struct m_tag *mtag = &p->tag;
.Ed
.Pp
Note that
.Ox
does not support cookies, it needs
.Va m_tag_id
to be globally unique.
To keep compatibility with
.Ox ,
a cookie
.Dv MTAG_ABI_COMPAT
is provided along with some compatibility functions.
When writing an
.Ox
compatible code, one should be careful not to take already
used tag type.
Tag types are defined in
.In sys/mbuf.h .
.Ss Packet Tag Manipulation Functions
.Bl -ohang -offset indent
.It Fn m_tag_alloc cookie type len wait
Allocate a new tag of type
.Fa type
and cookie
.Fa cookie
with
.Va len
bytes of space following the tag header itself.
The
.Fa wait
argument is passed directly to
.Xr malloc 9 .
If successful,
.Fn m_tag_alloc
returns a memory buffer of
.Pq Va len No + Fn sizeof "struct m_tag"
bytes.
Otherwise,
.Dv NULL
is returned.
A compatibility function
.Fn m_tag_get
is also provided.
.It Fn m_tag_copy tag how
Allocate a copy of
.Fa tag .
The
.Fa how
argument is passed directly to
.Fn m_tag_alloc .
The return values are the same as in
.Fn m_tag_alloc .
.It Fn m_tag_copy_chain tombuf frommbuf how
Allocate and copy all tags from mbuf
.Fa frommbuf
to mbuf
.Fa tombuf .
Returns 1 on success, and 0 on failure.
In the latter case, mbuf
.Fa tombuf
loses all its tags, even previously present.
.It Fn m_tag_delete mbuf tag
Remove
.Fa tag
from
.Fa mbuf Ns 's
list and free it.
.It Fn m_tag_delete_chain mbuf tag
Remove and free a packet tag chain, starting from
.Fa tag .
If
.Fa tag
is
.Dv NULL ,
all tags are deleted.
.It Fn m_tag_delete_nonpersistent mbuf
Traverse
.Fa mbuf Ns 's
tags and delete those which do not have the
.Dv MTAG_PERSISTENT
flag set.
.It Fn m_tag_first mbuf
Return the first tag associated with
.Fa mbuf .
.It Fn m_tag_free tag
Free
.Fa tag
using its
.Va m_tag_free
method.
The
.Fn m_tag_free_default
function
is used by default.
.It Fn m_tag_init mbuf
Initialize the tag storage for packet
.Fa mbuf .
.It Fn m_tag_locate mbuf cookie type tag
Search for a tag defined by
.Fa type
and
.Fa cookie
in
.Fa mbuf ,
starting from position specified by
.Fa tag .
If the latter is
.Dv NULL ,
then search through the whole list.
Upon success, a pointer to the first found tag is returned.
In either case,
.Dv NULL
is returned.
A compatibility function
.Fn m_tag_find
is also provided.
.It Fn m_tag_next mbuf tag
Return tag next to
.Fa tag
in
.Fa mbuf .
If absent,
.Dv NULL
is returned.
.It Fn m_tag_prepend mbuf tag
Add the new tag
.Fa tag
at the head of the tag list for packet
.Fa mbuf .
.It Fn m_tag_unlink mbuf tag
Remove tag
.Fa tag
from the list of tags of packet
.Fa mbuf .
.El
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
The tag-manipulating code is contained in the file
.Pa sys/kern/uipc_mbuf2.c .
Inlined functions are defined in
.In sys/mbuf.h .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr queue 3 ,
.Xr mbuf 9
.Sh HISTORY
The packet tags first appeared in
.Ox 2.9
and were written by
.An Angelos D. Keromytis Aq Mt angelos@openbsd.org .
