.\" Copyright (c) 1998, 1999, Nicolas Souchu
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 6, 1998
.Dt MICROSEQ 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm microseq
.Nd ppbus microsequencer developer's guide
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In dev/ppbus/ppbconf.h
.In dev/ppbus/ppb_msq.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
See
.Xr ppbus 4
for ppbus description and general info about the microsequencer.
.Pp
The purpose of this document is to encourage developers to use the
microsequencer mechanism in order to have:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
a uniform programming model
.It
efficient code
.El
.Pp
Before using microsequences, you are encouraged to look at
.Xr ppc 4
microsequencer implementation and an example of how using it in
.Xr vpo 4 .
.Sh PPBUS register model
.Ss Background
The parallel port model chosen for ppbus is the PC parallel port model.
Thus, any register described later has the same semantic than its counterpart
in a PC parallel port.
For more info about ISA/ECP programming, get the
Microsoft standard referenced as "Extended Capabilities Port Protocol and
ISA interface Standard".
Registers described later are standard parallel port
registers.
.Pp
Mask macros are defined in the standard ppbus include files for each valid
bit of parallel port registers.
.Ss Data register
In compatible or nibble mode, writing to this register will drive data to the
parallel port data lines.
In any other mode, drivers may be tri-stated by
setting the direction bit (PCD) in the control register.
Reads to this register
return the value on the data lines.
.Ss Device status register
This read-only register reflects the inputs on the parallel port interface.
.Pp
.Bl -column "Bit" "Name" "Description" -compact
.It Em Bit Ta Em Name Ta Em Description
.It 7 Ta nBUSY Ta "inverted version of parallel port Busy signal"
.It 6 Ta nACK Ta "version of parallel port nAck signal"
.It 5 Ta PERROR Ta "version of parallel port PERROR signal"
.It 4 Ta SELECT Ta "version of parallel port Select signal"
.It 3 Ta nFAULT Ta "version of parallel port nFault signal"
.El
.Pp
Others are reserved and return undefined result when read.
.Ss Device control register
This register directly controls several output signals as well as enabling
some functions.
.Pp
.Bl -column "Bit" "Name    " "Description" -compact
.It Em Bit Ta Em Name Ta Em Description
.It 5 Ta PCD Ta "direction bit in extended modes"
.It 4 Ta IRQENABLE Ta "1 enables an interrupt on the rising edge of nAck"
.It 3 Ta SELECTIN Ta "inverted and driven as parallel port nSelectin signal"
.It 2 Ta nINIT Ta "driven as parallel port nInit signal"
.It 1 Ta AUTOFEED Ta "inverted and driven as parallel port nAutoFd signal"
.It 0 Ta STROBE Ta "inverted and driven as parallel port nStrobe signal"
.El
.Sh MICROINSTRUCTIONS
.Ss Description
.Em Microinstructions
are either parallel port accesses, program iterations, submicrosequence or
C calls.
The parallel port must be considered as the logical model described in
.Xr ppbus 4 .
.Pp
Available microinstructions are:
.Bd -literal
#define MS_OP_GET       0	/* get <ptr>, <len>			*/
#define MS_OP_PUT       1	/* put <ptr>, <len>			*/
#define MS_OP_RFETCH	2	/* rfetch <reg>, <mask>, <ptr>		*/
#define MS_OP_RSET	3	/* rset <reg>, <mask>, <mask>		*/
#define MS_OP_RASSERT	4	/* rassert <reg>, <mask>		*/
#define MS_OP_DELAY     5	/* delay <val>				*/
#define MS_OP_SET       6	/* set <val>				*/
#define MS_OP_DBRA      7	/* dbra <offset>			*/
#define MS_OP_BRSET     8	/* brset <mask>, <offset>		*/
#define MS_OP_BRCLEAR   9	/* brclear <mask>, <offset>		*/
#define MS_OP_RET       10	/* ret <retcode>			*/
#define MS_OP_C_CALL	11	/* c_call <function>, <parameter>	*/
#define MS_OP_PTR	12	/* ptr <pointer>			*/
#define MS_OP_ADELAY	13	/* adelay <val>				*/
#define MS_OP_BRSTAT	14	/* brstat <mask>, <mask>, <offset>	*/
#define MS_OP_SUBRET	15	/* subret <code>			*/
#define MS_OP_CALL	16	/* call <microsequence>			*/
#define MS_OP_RASSERT_P	17	/* rassert_p <iter>, <reg>		*/
#define MS_OP_RFETCH_P	18	/* rfetch_p <iter>, <reg>, <mask>	*/
#define MS_OP_TRIG	19	/* trigger <reg>, <len>, <array>	*/
.Ed
.Ss Execution context
The
.Em execution context
of microinstructions is:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
the
.Em program counter
which points to the next microinstruction to execute either in the main
microsequence or in a subcall
.It
the current value of
.Em ptr
which points to the next char to send/receive
.It
the current value of the internal
.Em branch register
.El
.Pp
This data is modified by some of the microinstructions, not all.
.Ss MS_OP_GET and MS_OP_PUT
are microinstructions used to do either predefined standard IEEE1284-1994
transfers or programmed non-standard io.
.Ss MS_OP_RFETCH - Register FETCH
is used to retrieve the current value of a parallel port register, apply a
mask and save it in a buffer.
.Pp
Parameters:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
register
.It
character mask
.It
pointer to the buffer
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_RFETCH(reg,mask,ptr)
.Ss MS_OP_RSET - Register SET
is used to assert/clear some bits of a particular parallel port register,
two masks are applied.
.Pp
Parameters:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
register
.It
mask of bits to assert
.It
mask of bits to clear
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_RSET(reg,assert,clear)
.Ss MS_OP_RASSERT - Register ASSERT
is used to assert all bits of a particular parallel port register.
.Pp
Parameters:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
register
.It
byte to assert
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_RASSERT(reg,byte)
.Ss MS_OP_DELAY - microsecond DELAY
is used to delay the execution of the microsequence.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
delay in microseconds
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_DELAY(delay)
.Ss MS_OP_SET - SET internal branch register
is used to set the value of the internal branch register.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
integer value
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_SET(accum)
.Ss MS_OP_DBRA - \&Do BRAnch
is used to branch if internal branch register decremented by one result value
is positive.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
integer offset in the current executed (sub)microsequence.
Offset is added to
the index of the next microinstruction to execute.
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_DBRA(offset)
.Ss MS_OP_BRSET - BRanch on SET
is used to branch if some of the status register bits of the parallel port
are set.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
bits of the status register
.It
integer offset in the current executed (sub)microsequence.
Offset is added to
the index of the next microinstruction to execute.
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_BRSET(mask,offset)
.Ss MS_OP_BRCLEAR - BRanch on CLEAR
is used to branch if some of the status register bits of the parallel port
are cleared.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
bits of the status register
.It
integer offset in the current executed (sub)microsequence.
Offset is added to
the index of the next microinstruction to execute.
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_BRCLEAR(mask,offset)
.Ss MS_OP_RET - RETurn
is used to return from a microsequence.
This instruction is mandatory.
This
is the only way for the microsequencer to detect the end of the microsequence.
The return code is returned in the integer pointed by the (int *) parameter
of the ppb_MS_microseq().
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
integer return code
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_RET(code)
.Ss MS_OP_C_CALL - C function CALL
is used to call C functions from microsequence execution.
This may be useful
when a non-standard i/o is performed to retrieve a data character from the
parallel port.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
the C function to call
.It
the parameter to pass to the function call
.El
.Pp
The C function shall be declared as a
.Ft int(*)(void *p, char *ptr) .
The ptr parameter is the current position in the buffer currently scanned.
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_C_CALL(func,param)
.Ss MS_OP_PTR - initialize internal PTR
is used to initialize the internal pointer to the currently scanned buffer.
This pointer is passed to any C call (see above).
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
pointer to the buffer that shall be accessed by xxx_P() microsequence calls.
Note that this pointer is automatically incremented during xxx_P() calls
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_PTR(ptr)
.Ss MS_OP_ADELAY - do an Asynchronous DELAY
is used to make a tsleep() during microsequence execution.
The tsleep is
executed at PPBPRI level.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
delay in ms
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_ADELAY(delay)
.Ss MS_OP_BRSTAT - BRanch on STATe
is used to branch on status register state condition.
.Pp
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
mask of asserted bits.
Bits that shall be asserted in the status register
are set in the mask
.It
mask of cleared bits.
Bits that shall be cleared in the status register
are set in the mask
.It
integer offset in the current executed (sub)microsequence.
Offset is added
to the index of the next microinstruction to execute.
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_BRSTAT(asserted_bits,clear_bits,offset)
.Ss MS_OP_SUBRET - SUBmicrosequence RETurn
is used to return from the submicrosequence call.
This action is mandatory
before a RET call.
Some microinstructions (PUT, GET) may not be callable
within a submicrosequence.
.Pp
No parameter.
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_SUBRET()
.Ss MS_OP_CALL - submicrosequence CALL
is used to call a submicrosequence.
A submicrosequence is a microsequence with
a SUBRET call.
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
the submicrosequence to execute
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_CALL(microseq)
.Ss MS_OP_RASSERT_P - Register ASSERT from internal PTR
is used to assert a register with data currently pointed by the internal PTR
pointer.
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
amount of data to write to the register
.It
register
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_RASSERT_P(iter,reg)
.Ss MS_OP_RFETCH_P - Register FETCH to internal PTR
is used to fetch data from a register.
Data is stored in the buffer currently
pointed by the internal PTR pointer.
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
amount of data to read from the register
.It
register
.It
mask applied to fetched data
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_RFETCH_P(iter,reg,mask)
.Ss MS_OP_TRIG - TRIG register
is used to trigger the parallel port.
This microinstruction is intended to
provide a very efficient control of the parallel port.
Triggering a register
is writing data, wait a while, write data, wait a while...
This allows to
write magic sequences to the port.
Parameter:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
amount of data to read from the register
.It
register
.It
size of the array
.It
array of unsigned chars.
Each couple of u_chars define the data to write to
the register and the delay in us to wait.
The delay is limited to 255 us to
simplify and reduce the size of the array.
.El
.Pp
Predefined macro: MS_TRIG(reg,len,array)
.Sh MICROSEQUENCES
.Ss C structures
.Bd -literal
union ppb_insarg {
     int     i;
     char    c;
     void    *p;
     int     (* f)(void *, char *);
};

struct ppb_microseq {
     int                     opcode;         /* microins. opcode */
     union ppb_insarg        arg[PPB_MS_MAXARGS];    /* arguments */
};
.Ed
.Ss Using microsequences
To instantiate a microsequence, just declare an array of ppb_microseq
structures and initialize it as needed.
You may either use predefined macros
or code directly your microinstructions according to the ppb_microseq
definition.
For example,
.Bd -literal
     struct ppb_microseq select_microseq[] = {

	     /* parameter list
	      */
	     #define SELECT_TARGET    MS_PARAM(0, 1, MS_TYP_INT)
	     #define SELECT_INITIATOR MS_PARAM(3, 1, MS_TYP_INT)

	     /* send the select command to the drive */
	     MS_DASS(MS_UNKNOWN),
	     MS_CASS(H_nAUTO | H_nSELIN |  H_INIT | H_STROBE),
	     MS_CASS( H_AUTO | H_nSELIN |  H_INIT | H_STROBE),
	     MS_DASS(MS_UNKNOWN),
	     MS_CASS( H_AUTO | H_nSELIN | H_nINIT | H_STROBE),

	     /* now, wait until the drive is ready */
	     MS_SET(VP0_SELTMO),
/* loop: */     MS_BRSET(H_ACK, 2 /* ready */),
	     MS_DBRA(-2 /* loop */),
/* error: */    MS_RET(1),
/* ready: */    MS_RET(0)
     };
.Ed
.Pp
Here, some parameters are undefined and must be filled before executing
the microsequence.
In order to initialize each microsequence, one
should use the ppb_MS_init_msq() function like this:
.Bd -literal
     ppb_MS_init_msq(select_microseq, 2,
		     SELECT_TARGET, 1 << target,
		     SELECT_INITIATOR, 1 << initiator);
.Ed
.Pp
and then execute the microsequence.
.Ss The microsequencer
The microsequencer is executed either at ppbus or adapter level (see
.Xr ppbus 4
for info about ppbus system layers).
Most of the microsequencer is executed
at ppc level to avoid ppbus to adapter function call overhead.
But some
actions like deciding whereas the transfer is IEEE1284-1994 compliant are
executed at ppbus layer.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ppbus 4 ,
.Xr ppc 4 ,
.Xr vpo 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This
manual page was written by
.An Nicolas Souchu .
.Sh BUGS
Only one level of submicrosequences is allowed.
.Pp
When triggering the port, maximum delay allowed is 255 us.
