.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Alexander Langer
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 11, 2005
.Dt MODULE_DEPEND 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm MODULE_DEPEND
.Nd set kernel module dependencies
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/module.h
.Fn MODULE_DEPEND "name" "moddepend" "int minversion" "int prefversion" "int maxversion"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn MODULE_DEPEND
macro sets a dependency on another kernel module with name
.Fa moddepend ,
which has registered
its version with
.Fn MODULE_VERSION .
.Pp
The
.Fn MODULE_DEPEND
macro provides hints to the kernel
.Xr loader 8
and to the kernel linker to ensure that the named dependency is loaded
prior to the existing module.
It does not change or dictate the order in which modules are
initialized at runtime.
.Pp
Three versions must be specified for
.Fa moddepend :
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa prefversion"
.It Fa minversion
The minimum version on which the current module can depend.
.It Fa maxversion
The maximum version on which the current module can depend.
.It Fa prefversion
The preferred version on which the current module can depend.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
MODULE_DEPEND(foo, bar, 1, 3, 4);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr DECLARE_MODULE 9 ,
.Xr module 9 ,
.Xr MODULE_VERSION 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Alexander Langer Aq Mt alex@FreeBSD.org .
