.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2015 Mariusz Zaborski <oshogbo@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This documentation was written by Pawel Jakub Dawidek under sponsorship
.\" the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 19, 2018
.Dt NV 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nvlist_create ,
.Nm nvlist_destroy ,
.Nm nvlist_error ,
.Nm nvlist_set_error ,
.Nm nvlist_empty ,
.Nm nvlist_flags ,
.Nm nvlist_exists ,
.Nm nvlist_free ,
.Nm nvlist_clone ,
.Nm nvlist_dump ,
.Nm nvlist_fdump ,
.Nm nvlist_size ,
.Nm nvlist_pack ,
.Nm nvlist_unpack ,
.Nm nvlist_send ,
.Nm nvlist_recv ,
.Nm nvlist_xfer ,
.Nm nvlist_in_array ,
.Nm nvlist_next ,
.Nm nvlist_add ,
.Nm nvlist_move ,
.Nm nvlist_get ,
.Nm nvlist_take ,
.Nm nvlist_append
.Nd "library for name/value pairs"
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libnv
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/nv.h
.Ft "nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_create "int flags"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_destroy "nvlist_t *nvl"
.Ft int
.Fn nvlist_error "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_set_error "nvlist_t *nvl" "int error"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_empty "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.Ft int
.Fn nvlist_flags "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_in_array "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.\"
.Ft "nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_clone "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_dump "const nvlist_t *nvl" "int fd"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_fdump "const nvlist_t *nvl" "FILE *fp"
.\"
.Ft size_t
.Fn nvlist_size "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn nvlist_pack "const nvlist_t *nvl" "size_t *sizep"
.Ft "nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_unpack "const void *buf" "size_t size" "int flags"
.\"
.Ft int
.Fn nvlist_send "int sock" "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.Ft "nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_recv "int sock" "int flags"
.Ft "nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_xfer "int sock" "nvlist_t *nvl" "int flags"
.\"
.Ft "const char *"
.Fn nvlist_next "const nvlist_t *nvl" "int *typep" "void **cookiep"
.\"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_type "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "int type"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_null "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_bool "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_number "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_string "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_nvlist "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_descriptor "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_binary "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_bool_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_number_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_string_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_nvlist_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_exists_descriptor_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_null "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_bool "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "bool value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_number "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "uint64_t value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_string "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const char *value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_stringf "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const char *valuefmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_stringv "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const char *valuefmt" "va_list valueap"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_nvlist "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const nvlist_t *value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_descriptor "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "int value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_binary "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const void *value" "size_t size"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_bool_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const bool *value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_number_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const uint64_t *value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_string_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const char * const * value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_nvlist_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const nvlist_t * const * value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_add_descriptor_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const int *value" "size_t nitems"
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_string "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "char *value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_nvlist "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "nvlist_t *value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_descriptor "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "int value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_binary "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "void *value" "size_t size"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_bool_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "bool *value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_number_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "uint64_t *value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_string_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "char **value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_nvlist_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "nvlist_t **value" "size_t nitems"
.
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_move_descriptor_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "int *value" "size_t nitems"
.\"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_get_bool "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn nvlist_get_number "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft "const char *"
.Fn nvlist_get_string "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft "const nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_get_nvlist "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft int
.Fn nvlist_get_descriptor "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft "const void *"
.Fn nvlist_get_binary "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *sizep"
.Ft "const bool *"
.Fn nvlist_get_bool_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "const uint64_t *"
.Fn nvlist_get_number_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "const char * const *"
.Fn nvlist_get_string_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "const nvlist_t * const *"
.Fn nvlist_get_nvlist_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "const int *"
.Fn nvlist_get_descriptor_array "const nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "const nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_get_parent "const nvlist_t *nvl" "void **cookiep"
.Ft "const nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_get_array_next "const nvlist_t *nvl"
.Ft "const nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_get_pararr "const nvlist_t *nvl" "void **cookiep"
.\"
.Ft bool
.Fn nvlist_take_bool "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn nvlist_take_number "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft "char *"
.Fn nvlist_take_string "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft "nvlist_t *"
.Fn nvlist_take_nvlist "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft int
.Fn nvlist_take_descriptor "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn nvlist_take_binary "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *sizep"
.Ft "bool *"
.Fn nvlist_take_bool_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "uint64_t **"
.Fn nvlist_take_number_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "char **"
.Fn nvlist_take_string_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "nvlist_t **"
.Fn nvlist_take_nvlist_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.Ft "int *"
.Fn nvlist_take_descriptor_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "size_t *nitems"
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_append_bool_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const bool value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_append_number_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const uint64_t value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_append_string_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const char * const value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_append_nvlist_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "const nvlist_t * const value"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_append_descriptor_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "int value"
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_type "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name" "int type"
.\"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_null "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_bool "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_number "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_string "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_nvlist "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_descriptor "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_binary "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_bool_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_number_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_string_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_nvlist_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn nvlist_free_descriptor_array "nvlist_t *nvl" "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm libnv
library allows to easily manage name value pairs as well as send and receive
them over sockets.
A group (list) of name value pairs is called an
.Nm nvlist .
The API supports the following data types:
.Bl -ohang -offset indent
.It Sy null ( NV_TYPE_NULL )
There is no data associated with the name.
.It Sy bool ( NV_TYPE_BOOL )
The value can be either
.Dv true
or
.Dv false .
.It Sy number ( NV_TYPE_NUMBER )
The value is a number stored as
.Vt uint64_t .
.It Sy string ( NV_TYPE_STRING )
The value is a C string.
.It Sy nvlist ( NV_TYPE_NVLIST )
The value is a nested nvlist.
.It Sy descriptor ( NV_TYPE_DESCRIPTOR )
The value is a file descriptor.
Note that file descriptors can be sent only over
.Xr unix 4
domain sockets.
.It Sy binary ( NV_TYPE_BINARY )
The value is a binary buffer.
.It Sy bool array ( NV_TYPE_BOOL_ARRAY )
The value is an array of boolean values.
.It Sy number array ( NV_TYPE_NUMBER_ARRAY )
The value is an array of numbers, each stored as
.Vt uint64_t .
.It Sy string array ( NV_TYPE_STRING_ARRAY )
The value is an array of C strings.
.It Sy nvlist array  ( NV_TYPE_NVLIST_ARRAY )
The value is an array of nvlists.
When an nvlist is added to an array, it becomes part of the primary nvlist.
Traversing these arrays can be done using the
.Fn nvlist_get_array_next
and
.Fn nvlist_get_pararr
functions.
.It Sy descriptor array ( NV_TYPE_DESCRIPTOR_ARRAY )
The value is an array of files descriptors.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_create
function allocates memory and initializes an nvlist.
.Pp
The following flag can be provided:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "NV_FLAG_IGNORE_CASE" -compact -offset indent
.It Dv NV_FLAG_IGNORE_CASE
Perform case-insensitive lookups of provided names.
.It Dv NV_FLAG_NO_UNIQUE
Names in the nvlist do not have to be unique.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_destroy
function destroys the given nvlist.
Function does nothing if
.Dv NULL
nvlist is provided.
Function never modifies the
.Va errno
global variable.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_error
function returns any error value that the nvlist accumulated.
If the given nvlist is
.Dv NULL
the
.Er ENOMEM
error will be returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_set_error
function sets an nvlist to be in the error state.
Subsequent calls to
.Fn nvlist_error
will return the given error value.
This function cannot be used to clear the error state from an nvlist.
This function does nothing if the nvlist is already in the error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_empty
function returns
.Dv true
if the given nvlist is empty and
.Dv false
otherwise.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_flags
function returns flags used to create the nvlist with the
.Fn nvlist_create
function.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_in_array
function returns
.Dv true
if
.Fa nvl
is part of an array that is a member of another nvlist.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_clone
functions clones the given nvlist.
The clone shares no resources with its origin.
This also means that all file descriptors that are part of the nvlist will be
duplicated with the
.Xr dup 2
system call before placing them in the clone.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_dump
dumps nvlist content for debugging purposes to the given file descriptor
.Fa fd .
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_fdump
dumps nvlist content for debugging purposes to the given file stream
.Fa fp .
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_size
function returns the size of the given nvlist after converting it to binary
buffer with the
.Fn nvlist_pack
function.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_pack
function converts the given nvlist to a binary buffer.
The function allocates memory for the buffer, which should be freed with the
.Xr free 3
function.
If the
.Fa sizep
argument is not
.Dv NULL ,
the size of the buffer will be stored there.
The function returns
.Dv NULL
in case of an error (allocation failure).
If the nvlist contains any file descriptors
.Dv NULL
will be returned.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_unpack
function converts the given buffer to the nvlist.
The
.Fa flags
argument defines what type of the top level nvlist is expected to be.
Flags are set up using the
.Fn nvlist_create
function.
If the nvlist flags do not match the flags passed to
.Fn nvlist_unpack ,
the nvlist will not be returned.
Every nested nvlist list should be checked using
.Fn nvlist_flags
function.
The function returns
.Dv NULL
in case of an error.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_send
function sends the given nvlist over the socket given by the
.Fa sock
argument.
Note that nvlist that contains file descriptors can only be send over
.Xr unix 4
domain sockets.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_recv
function receives nvlist over the socket given by the
.Fa sock
argument.
The
.Fa flags
argument defines what type of the top level nvlist is expected to be.
Flags are set up using the
.Fn nvlist_create
function.
If the nvlist flags do not match the flags passed to
.Fn nvlist_recv ,
the nvlist will not be returned.
Every nested nvlist list should be checked using
.Fn nvlist_flags
function.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_xfer
function sends the given nvlist over the socket given by the
.Fa sock
argument and receives nvlist over the same socket.
The
.Fa flags
argument defines what type of the top level nvlist is expected to be.
Flags are set up using the
.Fn nvlist_create
function.
If the nvlist flags do not match the flags passed to
.Fn nvlist_xfer ,
the nvlist will not be returned.
Every nested nvlist list should be checked using
.Fn nvlist_flags
function.
The given nvlist is always destroyed.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_next
function iterates over the given nvlist returning names and types of subsequent
elements.
The
.Fa cookiep
argument allows the function to figure out which element should be returned
next.
The
.Va *cookiep
should be set to
.Dv NULL
for the first call and should not be changed later.
Returning
.Dv NULL
means there are no more elements on the nvlist.
The
.Fa typep
argument can be NULL.
Elements may not be removed from the nvlist while traversing it.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
Note that
.Fn nvlist_next
will handle
.Va cookiep
being set to
.Dv NULL .
In this case first element is returned or
.Dv NULL
if nvlist is empty.
This behavior simplifies removing the first element from the list.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_exists
function returns
.Dv true
if element of the given name exists (besides of its type) or
.Dv false
otherwise.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_exists_type
function returns
.Dv true
if element of the given name and the given type exists or
.Dv false
otherwise.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_exists_null ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_bool ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_number ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_string ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_nvlist ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_descriptor ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_binary ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_bool_array ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_number_array ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_string_array ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_nvlist_array ,
.Fn nvlist_exists_descriptor_array
functions return
.Dv true
if element of the given name and the given type determined by the function name
exists or
.Dv false
otherwise.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_add_null ,
.Fn nvlist_add_bool ,
.Fn nvlist_add_number ,
.Fn nvlist_add_string ,
.Fn nvlist_add_stringf ,
.Fn nvlist_add_stringv ,
.Fn nvlist_add_nvlist ,
.Fn nvlist_add_descriptor ,
.Fn nvlist_add_binary ,
.Fn nvlist_add_bool_array ,
.Fn nvlist_add_number_array ,
.Fn nvlist_add_string_array ,
.Fn nvlist_add_nvlist_array ,
.Fn nvlist_add_descriptor_array
functions add element to the given nvlist.
When adding string or binary buffer the functions will allocate memory
and copy the data over.
When adding nvlist, the nvlist will be cloned and clone will be added.
When adding descriptor, the descriptor will be duplicated using the
.Xr dup 2
system call and the new descriptor will be added.
The array functions will fail if there are any
.Dv NULL
elements in the array, or if the array pointer is
.Dv NULL .
If an error occurs while adding new element, internal error is set which can be
examined using the
.Fn nvlist_error
function.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_move_string ,
.Fn nvlist_move_nvlist ,
.Fn nvlist_move_descriptor ,
.Fn nvlist_move_binary ,
.Fn nvlist_move_bool_array ,
.Fn nvlist_move_number_array ,
.Fn nvlist_move_string_array ,
.Fn nvlist_move_nvlist_array ,
.Fn nvlist_move_descriptor_array
functions add new element to the given nvlist, but unlike
.Fn nvlist_add_<type>
functions they will consume the given resource.
In the case of strings, descriptors, or nvlists every elements must be
unique, or it could cause a double free.
The array functions will fail if there are any
.Dv NULL
elements, or if the array pointer is
.Dv NULL .
If an error occurs while adding new element, the resource is destroyed and
internal error is set which can be examined using the
.Fn nvlist_error
function.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_get_bool ,
.Fn nvlist_get_number ,
.Fn nvlist_get_string ,
.Fn nvlist_get_nvlist ,
.Fn nvlist_get_descriptor ,
.Fn nvlist_get_binary ,
.Fn nvlist_get_bool_array ,
.Fn nvlist_get_number_array ,
.Fn nvlist_get_string_array ,
.Fn nvlist_get_nvlist_array ,
.Fn nvlist_get_descriptor_array
functions return the value that corresponds to the given key name.
In the case of strings, nvlists, descriptors, binary, or arrays, the returned
resource should not be modified - they still belong to the nvlist.
If an element of the given name does not exist, the program will be aborted.
To avoid this, the caller should check for the existence of the name before
trying to obtain the value, or use the
.Xr dnvlist 3
extension, which can provide a default value in the case of a missing element.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_get_parent
function returns the parent nvlist of the nested nvlist.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_get_array_next
function returns the next element from the array or
.Dv NULL
if the nvlist is not in array or it is the last element.
Note that
.Fn nvlist_get_array_next
only works if you added the nvlist array using the
.Fn nvlist_move_nvlist_array
or
.Fn nvlist_add_nvlist_array
functions.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_get_pararr
function returns the next element in the array, or if not available
the parent of the nested nvlist.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_take_bool ,
.Fn nvlist_take_number ,
.Fn nvlist_take_string ,
.Fn nvlist_take_nvlist ,
.Fn nvlist_take_descriptor ,
.Fn nvlist_take_binary ,
.Fn nvlist_take_bool_array ,
.Fn nvlist_take_number_array ,
.Fn nvlist_take_string_array ,
.Fn nvlist_take_nvlist_array ,
.Fn nvlist_take_descriptor_array
functions return value associated with the given name and remove the element
from the nvlist.
In case of string and binary values, the caller is responsible for free returned
memory using the
.Xr free 3
function.
In case of nvlist, the caller is responsible for destroying returned nvlist
using the
.Fn nvlist_destroy
function.
In case of descriptor, the caller is responsible for closing returned descriptor
using the
.Fn close 2
system call.
If an element of the given name does not exist, the program will be aborted.
To avoid that the caller should check for the existence of the given name
before trying to obtain the value, or use the
.Xr dnvlist 3
extension, which can provide a default value in the case of a missing element.
In the case of an array of strings or binary values, the caller is responsible
for freeing every element of the array using the
.Xr free 3
function.
In the case of an array of nvlists, the caller is responsible for destroying
every element of array using the
.Fn nvlist_destroy
function.
In the case of descriptors, the caller is responsible for closing every
element of array using the
.Fn close 2
system call.
In every case involving an array, the caller must also free the pointer to
the array using the
.Xr free 3
function.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_append_bool_array ,
.Fn nvlist_append_number_array ,
.Fn nvlist_append_string_array ,
.Fn nvlist_append_nvlist_array ,
.Fn nvlist_append_descriptor_array
functions append an element to the existing array using the same semantics
as the add functions (i.e. the element will be copied when applicable).
If the array for a given key does not exist, then it will be created
as if using the
.Fn nvlist_add_<type>_array
function.
The internal error is set on append failure.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_free
function removes element of the given name from the nvlist (besides of its type)
and frees all resources associated with it.
If element of the given name does not exist, the program will be aborted.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_free_type
function removes element of the given name and the given type from the nvlist
and frees all resources associated with it.
If element of the given name and the given type does not exist, the program
will be aborted.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Pp
The
.Fn nvlist_free_null ,
.Fn nvlist_free_bool ,
.Fn nvlist_free_number ,
.Fn nvlist_free_string ,
.Fn nvlist_free_nvlist ,
.Fn nvlist_free_descriptor ,
.Fn nvlist_free_binary ,
.Fn nvlist_free_bool_array ,
.Fn nvlist_free_number_array ,
.Fn nvlist_free_string_array ,
.Fn nvlist_free_nvlist_array ,
.Fn nvlist_free_descriptor_array
functions remove element of the given name and the given type determined by the
function name from the nvlist and free all resources associated with it.
If element of the given name and the given type does not exist, the program
will be aborted.
The nvlist must not be in error state.
.Sh NOTES
The
.Fn nvlist_pack
and
.Fn nvlist_unpack
functions handle the byte-order conversions, so the binary buffer can be
packed/unpacked by the hosts with the different endianness.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example demonstrates how to prepare an nvlist and send it over
.Xr unix 4
domain socket.
.Bd -literal
nvlist_t *nvl;
int fd;

fd = open("/tmp/foo", O_RDONLY);
if (fd < 0)
        err(1, "open(\\"/tmp/foo\\") failed");

nvl = nvlist_create(0);
/*
 * There is no need to check if nvlist_create() succeeded,
 * as the nvlist_add_<type>() functions can cope.
 * If it failed, nvlist_send() will fail.
 */
nvlist_add_string(nvl, "filename", "/tmp/foo");
nvlist_add_number(nvl, "flags", O_RDONLY);
/*
 * We just want to send the descriptor, so we can give it
 * for the nvlist to consume (that's why we use nvlist_move
 * not nvlist_add).
 */
nvlist_move_descriptor(nvl, "fd", fd);
if (nvlist_send(sock, nvl) < 0) {
	nvlist_destroy(nvl);
	err(1, "nvlist_send() failed");
}
nvlist_destroy(nvl);
.Ed
.Pp
Receiving nvlist and getting data:
.Bd -literal
nvlist_t *nvl;
const char *command;
char *filename;
int fd;

nvl = nvlist_recv(sock, 0);
if (nvl == NULL)
	err(1, "nvlist_recv() failed");

/* For command we take pointer to nvlist's buffer. */
command = nvlist_get_string(nvl, "command");
/*
 * For filename we remove it from the nvlist and take
 * ownership of the buffer.
 */
filename = nvlist_take_string(nvl, "filename");
/* The same for the descriptor. */
fd = nvlist_take_descriptor(nvl, "fd");

printf("command=%s filename=%s fd=%d\n", command, filename, fd);

nvlist_destroy(nvl);
free(filename);
close(fd);
/* command was freed by nvlist_destroy() */
.Ed
.Pp
Iterating over nvlist:
.Bd -literal
nvlist_t *nvl;
const char *name;
void *cookie;
int type;

nvl = nvlist_recv(sock, 0);
if (nvl == NULL)
	err(1, "nvlist_recv() failed");

cookie = NULL;
while ((name = nvlist_next(nvl, &type, &cookie)) != NULL) {
	printf("%s=", name);
	switch (type) {
	case NV_TYPE_NUMBER:
		printf("%ju", (uintmax_t)nvlist_get_number(nvl, name));
		break;
	case NV_TYPE_STRING:
		printf("%s", nvlist_get_string(nvl, name));
		break;
	default:
		printf("N/A");
		break;
	}
	printf("\\n");
}
.Ed
.Pp
Iterating over every nested nvlist:
.Bd -literal
nvlist_t *nvl;
const char *name;
void *cookie;
int type;

nvl = nvlist_recv(sock, 0);
if (nvl == NULL)
	err(1, "nvlist_recv() failed");

cookie = NULL;
do {
	while ((name = nvlist_next(nvl, &type, &cookie)) != NULL) {
		if (type == NV_TYPE_NVLIST) {
			nvl = nvlist_get_nvlist(nvl, name);
			cookie = NULL;
		}
	}
} while ((nvl = nvlist_get_parent(nvl, &cookie)) != NULL);
.Ed
.Pp
Iterating over every nested nvlist and every nvlist element:
.Bd -literal
nvlist_t *nvl;
const nvlist_t * const *array;
const char *name;
void *cookie;
int type;

nvl = nvlist_recv(sock, 0);
if (nvl == null)
	err(1, "nvlist_recv() failed");

cookie = null;
do {
	while ((name = nvlist_next(nvl, &type, &cookie)) != NULL) {
		if (type == NV_TYPE_NVLIST) {
			nvl = nvlist_get_nvlist(nvl, name);
			cookie = NULL;
		} else if (type == NV_TYPE_NVLIST_ARRAY) {
			nvl = nvlist_get_nvlist_array(nvl, name, NULL)[0];
			cookie = NULL;
		}
	}
} while ((nvl = nvlist_get_pararr(nvl, &cookie)) != NULL);
.Ed
.Pp
Or alternatively:
.Bd -literal
nvlist_t *nvl, *tmp;
const nvlist_t * const *array;
const char *name;
void *cookie;
int type;

nvl = nvlist_recv(sock, 0);
if (nvl == null)
	err(1, "nvlist_recv() failed");

cooke = NULL;
tmp = nvl;
do {
	do {
		nvl = tmp;
		while ((name = nvlist_next(nvl, &type, &cookie)) != NULL) {
			if (type == NV_TYPE_NVLIST) {
				nvl = nvlist_get_nvlist(nvl,
				    name);
				cookie = NULL;
			} else if (type == NV_TYPE_NVLIST_ARRAY) {
				nvl = nvlist_get_nvlist_array(nvl, name,
				    NULL)[0];
				cookie = NULL;
			}
		}
		cookie = NULL;
	} while ((tmp = nvlist_get_array_next(nvl)) != NULL);
} while ((tmp = nvlist_get_parent(nvl, &cookie)) != NULL);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr dup 2 ,
.Xr open 2 ,
.Xr err 3 ,
.Xr free 3 ,
.Xr printf 3 ,
.Xr unix 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm libnv
library appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm libnv
library was implemented by
.An Pawel Jakub Dawidek Aq Mt pawel@dawidek.net
under sponsorship from the FreeBSD Foundation.
