.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Oleksandr Tymoshenko
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 8, 2018
.Dt ofw_bus_status_okay 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ofw_bus_get_status
.Nm ofw_bus_status_okay
.Nm ofw_bus_node_status_okay
.Nd check status of the device tree node
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In dev/ofw/openfirm.h
.In dev/ofw/ofw_bus.h
.In dev/ofw/ofw_bus_subr.h
.Ft const char *
.Fn ofw_bus_get_status "device_t dev"
.Ft int
.Fn ofw_bus_status_okay "device_t dev"
.Ft int
.Fn ofw_bus_node_status_okay "phandle_t node"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
The "status" property of the device tree node indicates whether the device is
enabled or not.
Multiple hardware versions might be built using the same base System-on-Chip
but with a different set of blocks enabled.
It is common to use  SoC device tree and only enable/disable device nodes for
the derivative boards.
The device tree node is considered enabled only if it has "status" property
with the value set to either "ok" or "okay".
.Pp
.Fn ofw_bus_get_status
returns the value of the "status" property of the device tree node associated with the device
.Fa dev .
If the node does not have "status" property or there is no node associated with
the device the function returns NULL.
.Pp
.Fn ofw_bus_status_okay
returns 1 if the device tree node associated with the device
.Fa dev
has "status" property and its value is either "ok" or "okay".
.Pp
.Fn ofw_bus_node_status_okay
returns 1 if the device tree node
.Fa node
has "status" property and its value is either "ok" or "okay".
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Oleksandr Tymoshenko .
