.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 M. Warner Losh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 22, 2016
.Dt OWLL 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm owll
.Nm OWLL_WRITE_ONE ,
.Nm OWLL_WRITE_ZERO ,
.Nm OWLL_READ_DATA ,
.Nm OWLL_REASET_AND_PRESENCE
.Nd Dallas Semiconductor 1-Wire Link Layer Interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ft int
.Fn OWLL_WRITE_ONE "device_t lldev" "struct ow_timing *timing"
.Ft int
.Fn OWLL_WRITE_ZERO "device_t lldev" "struct ow_timing *timing"
.Ft int
.Fn OWLL_READ_DATA "device_t lldev" "struct ow_timing *timing" "int *bit"
.Ft int
.Fn OWLL_RESET_AND_PRESENCE "device_t lldev" "struct ow_timing *timing" "int *bit"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface provides access to the link layer of the Dallas
Semiconductor 1-Wire from upper layers of the protocol.
.Pp
.Fn OWLL_WRITE_ONE
and
.Fn OWLL_WRITE_ZERO
writes a one bit or a zero bit respectively on the 1-Wire bus.
.Pp
.Fn OWLL_READ_DATA
reads one bit from the 1-Wire bus.
This is often referred to as a
.Dq Read Time Slot
in the 1-Wire device data sheets.
.Pp
The
.Fn OWLL_RESET_AND_PRESENCE
function starts a reset sequence and detects if any device(s) are
present on the bus.
This is the beginning of all 1-Wire transactions.
.Sh NOTES
This interface is intended to be used only by the
.Xr ow 4
device to talk to the low-level bus.
By convention, the device that implements this interface is called
.Xr owc 4 .
Only devices that implement
.Xr own 9
should call these interfaces.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ow 4 ,
.Xr owc 4 ,
.Xr own 9
.Sh LEGAL
.Tn 1-Wire
is a registered trademark of Maxim Integrated Products, Inc.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver and this manual page were written by
.An Warner Losh .
