.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Sandvine Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 28, 2015
.Dt PCI_IOV_ADD_VF 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PCI_IOV_ADD_VF
.Nd inform a PF driver that a VF is being created
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/bus.h
.In machine/stdarg.h
.In sys/nv.h
.In dev/pci/pci_iov.h
.Ft int
.Fn PCI_IOV_ADD_VF "device_t dev" "uint16_t vfnum" "const nvlist_t *vf_config"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn PCI_IOV_ADD_VF
method is called by the PCI Single-Root I/O Virtualization
.Pq SR-IOV
infrastructure when it is initializating a new Virtual Function (VF) as a child
of the given Physical Function (PF) device.
This method will not be called until a successful call to
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9
has been made.
It is not guaranteed that this method will be called following a successful call
to
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9 .
If the infrastructure encounters a failure to allocate resources following the
call to
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9 ,
the VF creation will be aborted and
.Xr PCI_IOV_UNINIT 9
will be called immediately without any preceding calls to
.Nm .
.Pp
The index of the VF being initialized is passed in the
.Fa vfnum
argument.
VFs are always numbered sequentially starting at 0.
.Pp
If the driver requested device-specific configuration parameters via a VF schema
in its call to
.Xr pci_iov_attach 9 ,
those parameters will be contained in the
.Pa vf_config
argument.
All configuration parameters that were either set as required parameters or that
had a default value set in the VF schema are guaranteed to be present in
.Fa vf_config .
Configuration parameters that were neither set as required nor were given a
default value are optional and may or may not be present in
.Fa vf_config .
.Fa vf_config
will not contain any configuration parameters that were not specified in the VF
schema.
All configuration parameters will have the correct type and will be in the range
of valid values specified in the schema.
.Pp
Note that it is possible for the user to set different configuration values on
different VF devices that are children of the same PF.
The PF driver must not cache configuration parameters passed in previous calls
to
.Fn PCI_IOV_ADD_VF
for other VFs and apply those parameters to the current VF.
.Pp
This function will not be called twice for the same
.Fa vf_num
on the same PF device without
.Xr PCI_IOV_UNINIT 9
and
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9
first being called, in that order.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
This method returns 0 on success, otherwise an appropriate error is returned.
If this method returns an error then the current VF device will be destroyed
but the rest of the VF devices will be created and SR-IOV will be enabled on
the PF.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nv 9 ,
.Xr pci 9 ,
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9 ,
.Xr pci_iov_schema 9 ,
.Xr PCI_IOV_UNINIT 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Ryan Stone Aq Mt rstone@FreeBSD.org .
