.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Sandvine Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 28, 2015
.Dt PCI_IOV_UNINIT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PCI_IOV_UNINIT
.Nd disable SR-IOV on a PF device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/bus.h
.In dev/pci/pci_iov.h
.Ft void
.Fn PCI_IOV_UNINIT "device_t dev"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn PCI_IOV_UNINIT
method is called by the PCI Single-Root I/O Virtualization (SR-IOV)
infrastructure when the user requests that SR-IOV be disabled on a Physical
Function (PF).
When this method is called, the PF driver must release any SR-IOV-related
resources that it has allocated and disable any device-specific SR-IOV
configuration in the device.
.Pp
This method will only be called following a successful call to
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9 .
It is not guaranteed that
.Xr PCI_IOV_ADD_VF 9
will have been called for any Virtual Function (VF) after the call to
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9
and before the call to
.Nm .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pci 9 ,
.Xr PCI_IOV_ADD_VF 9 ,
.Xr PCI_IOV_INIT 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Ryan Stone Aq Mt rstone@FreeBSD.org .
