.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Evan Sarmiento.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 11, 2001
.Dt PFIND 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pfind , zpfind
.Nd locate a process by number
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/proc.h
.Ft "struct proc *"
.Fn pfind "pid_t pid"
.Ft "struct proc *"
.Fn zpfind "pid_t pid"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn pfind
takes a
.Fa pid
as its argument and returns a pointer to the
.Vt proc
structure whose PID is specified in the argument only if the
.Fa pid
is on the
.Va allproc
list.
.Pp
.Fn zpfind
takes a
.Fa pid
as its argument.
If
.Fn zpfind
finds a process whose PID is equal to that of argument
and is a zombie process, meaning that it must reside on the
.Va zombproc
list,
.Fn zpfind
returns a pointer to that
.Vt proc
structure.
.Pp
Both
.Fn pfind
and
.Fn zpfind
lock the
.Vt proc
structure that is returned using
.Fn PROC_LOCK "p" .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn pfind
and
.Fn zpfind
return a pointer to a
.Vt proc
structure on success and a
.Dv NULL
on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pgfind 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Evan Sarmiento Aq Mt kaworu@sektor7.ath.cx .
