.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Sergey Kandaurov
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 3, 2014
.Dt PGET 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pget
.Nd locate a process by number
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/proc.h
.Ft int
.Fn pget "pid_t pid" "int flags" "struct proc **pp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This function
takes a
.Fa pid
as its argument,
which can be either a process or thread id,
and fills a pointer to the
.Vt proc
structure in
.Fa *pp .
In the latter case, a process owning the specified thread is looked for.
The operation is performed by invoking the
.Xr pfind 9
function.
The found process is returned locked.
For the
.Dv PGET_HOLD
case, it is returned unlocked (but held).
The
.Fn pget
function can
perform additional manipulations, depending on a
.Fa flags
argument.
.Pp
The
.Fa flags
argument is the logical OR of some subset of:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv PGET_NOTINEXEC"
.It Dv PGET_HOLD
If set, the found process will be held and unlocked.
.It Dv PGET_CANSEE
If set, the found process will be checked for its visibility.
See
.Xr p_cansee 9 .
.It Dv PGET_CANDEBUG
If set, the found process will be checked for its debuggability.
See
.Xr p_candebug 9 .
.It Dv PGET_ISCURRENT
If set, the found process will be checked that it matches the current
process context.
.It Dv PGET_NOTWEXIT
If set, the found process will be checked that it does not have the process
flag
.Dv P_WEXIT
set.
.It Dv PGET_NOTINEXEC
If set, the found process will be checked that it does not have the process
flag
.Dv P_INEXEC
set.
.It Dv PGET_NOTID
If set,
.Fa pid
is not assumed as a thread id for values larger than
.Dv PID_MAX .
.It Dv PGET_WANTREAD
If set, the found process will be checked that the caller may get
a read access to its structure.
A shorthand for
.Pq Dv PGET_HOLD | PGET_CANDEBUG | PGET_NOTWEXIT .
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If the process is found in the specified way, then zero is returned,
otherwise an appropriate error code is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr p_candebug 9 ,
.Xr p_cansee 9 ,
.Xr pfind 9
