.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 21, 2003
.Dt PMAP_RESIDENT_COUNT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pmap_resident_count ,
.Nm pmap_wired_count
.Nd return page resident and wiring statistics
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/pmap.h
.Ft long
.Fn pmap_resident_count "pmap_t pmap"
.Ft long
.Fn pmap_wired_count "pmap_t pmap"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pmap_resident_count
and
.Fn pmap_wired_count
macros allow
.Nm pmap
consumers to retrieve statistics from the
.Va pm_stats
member of the machine-dependent structure
.Vt struct pmap .
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Both functions are defined as in-line macros.
The members which they access have type
.Vt long .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pmap_resident_count
returns the number of pages in the physical map
.Va pmap
which are currently resident in main memory.
.Pp
The
.Fn pmap_wired_count
returns the number of pages in the physical map
.Va pmap
which are currently wired into in main memory.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pmap 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
