.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 10, 2005
.Dt PMAP_INIT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pmap_init ,
.Nm pmap_init2
.Nd initialize the pmap subsystem
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/pmap.h
.Ft void
.Fn pmap_init "void"
.Ft void
.Fn pmap_init2 "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pmap_init
function initializes the
.Xr pmap 9
sub-system.
It is called during system initialization by
.Fn vm_init ,
to initialize any structures that the
.Nm
system needs in order to map between physical and virtual memory.
.Pp
The
.Fn pmap_init2
function initializes a zone for the PV entries.
These are used to implement page sharing at the physical level.
A high water mark is set so that the system can recover from
excessive numbers of PV entries.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pmap 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
