.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 15, 2018
.Dt PMAP_QENTER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pmap_qenter ,
.Nm pmap_qremove
.Nd manage temporary kernel space mappings
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/pmap.h
.Ft void
.Fn pmap_qenter "vm_offset_t sva" "vm_page_t *m" "int count"
.Ft void
.Fn pmap_qremove "vm_offset_t sva" "int count"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pmap_qenter
function accepts a linear array of
.Fa count
pointers to wired pages
.Fa *m ,
and enters each of these pages into the kernel virtual address (KVA) space,
beginning at the address
.Fa sva .
The pages are mapped non-executable, if possible.
(For example, non-PAE i386 has no capability to map pages non-executable.)
.Pp
The
.Fn pmap_qremove
function tears out a mapping from the kernel virtual address space,
beginning at
.Fa sva
and for
.Fa count
pages.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
.Fn pmap_qenter
function is intended for temporary mappings that do not require page
modification or reference counting.
Old mappings are simply overwritten.
The pages
.Em must
be wired into physical memory.
.Pp
The corresponding
.Fn pmap_qremove
function is intended to remove such temporary mappings.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pmap 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
