.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 21, 2003
.Dt PMAP_COPY 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pmap_copy ,
.Nm pmap_copy_page
.Nd copy physical memory pages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/pmap.h
.Ft void
.Fo pmap_copy
.Fa "pmap_t dst_pmap" "pmap_t src_pmap" "vm_offset_t dst_addr"
.Fa "vm_size_t len" "vm_offset_t src_addr"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn pmap_copy_page "vm_page_t src" "vm_page_t dst"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pmap_copy
function copies the range specified by
.Fa src_addr
and
.Fa len
from the source physical map
.Fa src_pmap
to the destination physical map
.Fa dst_pmap
at the address
.Fa dst_addr .
.Pp
The
.Fn pmap_copy_page
function
copies the physical page
.Fa src
to the physical page
.Fa dst ,
by mapping the page into kernel virtual address space (KVA), and using
.Fn bcopy
to copy the page.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
.Fn pmap_copy
routine is only advisory and need not do anything.
Actually implementing it may seriously reduce system performance.
.Pp
The
.Fn pmap_copy_page
routine only operates upon a single page.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bcopy 3 ,
.Xr pmap 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
