.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Emmanuel Vadot <manu@freebsd.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 12, 2018
.Dt PWMBUS 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pwmbus ,
.Nm pwmbus_attach_bus ,
.Nm PWMBUS_GET_BUS ,
.Nm PWMBUS_CHANNEL_CONFIG ,
.Nm PWMBUS_CHANNEL_GET_CONFIG ,
.Nm PWMBUS_CHANNEL_SET_FLAGS ,
.Nm PWMBUS_CHANNEL_GET_FLAGS ,
.Nm PWMBUS_CHANNEL_ENABLE ,
.Nm PWMBUS_CHANNEL_IS_ENABLED ,
.Nm PWMBUS_CHANNEL_MAX
.Nd PWMBUS methods
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device pwm"
.In "pwmbus_if.h"
.Ft device_t
.Fn pwmbus_attach_bus "device_t dev"
.Ft int
.Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_CONFIG "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint64_t period" "uint64_t duty"
.Ft int
.Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_GET_CONFIG "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint64_t *period" "uint64_t *duty"
.Ft int
.Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_SET_FLAGS "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint32_t flags"
.Ft int
.Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_GET_FLAGS "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint32_t *flags"
.Ft int
.Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_ENABLE "device_t bus" "int channel" "bool enable"
.Ft int
.Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_IS_ENABLED "device_t bus" "int channel" "bool *enabled"
.Ft int
.Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_MAX "device_t bus" "int channel" "int *nchannel"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The PWMBUS (Pulse-Width Modulation) interface allows the device driver to register to a global
bus so other devices in the kernel can use them in a generic way
.Sh INTERFACE
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fn pwmbus_attach_bus "device_t dev"
Attach the
.Nm pwmbus
to the device driver
.It Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_CONFIG "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint64_t period" "uint64_t duty"
Configure the period and duty (in nanoseconds) in the PWM controller on the bus for the specified channel.
Returns 0 on success or
.Er EINVAL
is the values are not supported by the controller or
.Er EBUSY
is the PWMBUS controller is in use and doesn't support changing the value on the fly.
.It Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_GET_CONFIG "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint64_t *period" "uint64_t *duty"
Get the current configuration of the period and duty for the specified channel.
.It Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_SET_FLAGS "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint32_t flags"
Set the flags of the channel (like inverted polarity), if the driver or controller
doesn't support this a default method is used.
.It Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_GET_FLAGS "device_t bus" "int channel" "uint32_t *flags"
Get the current flags for the channel, if the driver or controller
doesn't support this, a default method is used.
.It Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_ENABLE "device_t bus" "int channel" "bool enable"
Enable the PWM channel.
.It Fn PWMBUS_CHANNEL_ISENABLED "device_t bus" "int channel" "bool *enable"
Test if the PWM channel is enabled.
.It PWMBUS_CHANNEL_MAX "device_t bus" "int channel" "int *nchannel"
Get the maximum number of channel supported by the controller.
.El
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm pwmbus
interface first appear in
.Fx 13.0 .
The
.Nm pwmbus
interface and manual page was written by
.An Emmanuel Vadot Aq Mt manu@FreeBSD.org .
