.\"     $OpenBSD: route.9,v 1.17 2017/01/11 15:09:52 rzalamena Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Bret S. Lambert <blambert@openbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: January 11 2017 $
.Dt RT_SETGATE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rt_setgate ,
.Nm rtredirect ,
.Nm rtdeletemsg
.Nd kernel routing interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In net/route.h
.Ft int
.Fn rt_setgate "struct rtentry *rt" "struct sockaddr *gate" "u_int tableid"
.Ft void
.Fn rtredirect "struct sockaddr *dst" "struct sockaddr *gateway" \
"struct sockaddr *src" "struct rtentry **rtp" "unsigned int rdomain"
.Ft int
.Fn rtdeletemsg "struct rtentry *rt" "struct ifnet *ifp" "u_int tableid"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Routing entries describe the routes to be taken by packets in a router.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fn rt_setgate "struct rtentry *rt" "struct sockaddr *gate" "u_int tableid"
Set the address of the gateway for routes described by
.Fa rt
to
.Fa gate .
If memory must be allocated to hold the gateway address,
the address for which
.Fa rt
describes routes will be copied from
.Fa gate .
.It Fn rtredirect "struct sockaddr *dst" "struct sockaddr *gateway" \
"struct sockaddr *src" "struct rtentry **rtp" "unsigned int rdomain"
Redirect routes to
.Fa dst
through
.Fa gateway ,
such as in response to an ICMP redirect message.
.Fa src
should be the address from which the redirect message was received.
If
.Fa rtp
is not NULL,
it will be populated by the routing entry corresponding to
.Fa dst .
.It Fn rtdeletemsg "struct rtentry *rt" "struct ifnet *ifp" "u_int tableid"
Delete routing table entry
.Fa rt
from table
.Fa tableid
and forward a notification message to all
.Fa AF_ROUTE
sockets.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn rt_setgate
may fail with:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Er -compact
.It Bq Er ENOBUFS
Memory could not be allocated for the gateway.
.El
.Pp
.Fn rtdeletemsg
may fail with:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Er -compact
.It Bq Er EAFNOSUPPORT
The protocol used by
.Fa rt
is not supported by table with ID
.Fa tableid .
.It Bq Er ESRCH
No routing entry for
.Fa rt
could be found.
.It Bq Er ESRCH
.Fa rt
is a multipath routing entry that conflicts with an existing one.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr route 4 ,
.Xr route 8 ,
.Xr rt_timer_add 9 ,
.Xr rtable_add 9 ,
.Xr rtlabel_id2name 9 ,
.Xr rtrequest 9
