.\"     $OpenBSD: rtable_add.9,v 1.9 2021/03/26 22:41:06 mvs Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Bret S. Lambert <blambert@openbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: March 26 2021 $
.Dt RTABLE_ADD 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rtable_add ,
.Nm rtable_exists ,
.Nm rtable_loindex ,
.Nm rtable_l2 ,
.Nm rtable_l2set
.Nd routing tables and routing domains interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In net/rtable.h
.Ft int
.Fn rtable_add "unsigned int id"
.Ft int
.Fn rtable_exists "unsigned int id"
.Ft unsigned int
.Fn rtable_loindex "unsigned int id"
.Ft unsigned int
.Fn rtable_l2 "unsigned int id"
.Ft void
.Fn rtable_l2set "unsigned int id" "unsigned int rdomain"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Routing tables contain layer 2 and 3 forwarding information.
Each address family in use will have its own routing table.
Routing domains are a way of logically segmenting a router among multiple
networks and may contain more than one routing table.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fn rtable_add "unsigned int id"
Add routing table with ID of
.Fa id
to routing domain
.Fa 0 .
.It Fn rtable_exists "unsigned int id"
Return
.Fa 1
if routing table with ID
.Fa id
exists,
.Fa 0
otherwise.
.It Fn rtable_loindex "unsigned int id"
Return the default
.Xr lo 4
interface index for the routing table with ID of
.Fa id .
.It Fn rtable_l2 "unsigned int id"
Get the routing domain of routing table with ID of
.Fa id .
.It Fn rtable_l2set "unsigned int id" "unsigned int rdomain"
Place routing table with ID of
.Fa id
under the routing domain with ID of
.Fa rdomain .
.El
.Sh CONTEXT
.Fn rtable_add ,
.Fn rtable_exists ,
.Fn rtable_loindex ,
.Fn rtable_l2 ,
and
.Fn task_l2set
can be called during autoconf, from process context, or from interrupt context.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn rtable_add
may fail with:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Er -compact
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Memory could not be allocated to extend the list of routing domains.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lo 4 ,
.Xr route 4 ,
.Xr route 8
