.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Jason Evans <jasone@FreeBSD.org>.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 1, 2006
.Dt SEMA 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sema ,
.Nm sema_init ,
.Nm sema_destroy ,
.Nm sema_post ,
.Nm sema_wait ,
.Nm sema_timedwait ,
.Nm sema_trywait ,
.Nm sema_value
.Nd kernel counting semaphore
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/lock.h
.In sys/sema.h
.Ft void
.Fn sema_init "struct sema *sema" "int value" "const char *description"
.Ft void
.Fn sema_destroy "struct sema *sema"
.Ft void
.Fn sema_post "struct sema *sema"
.Ft void
.Fn sema_wait "struct sema *sema"
.Ft int
.Fn sema_timedwait "struct sema *sema" "int timo"
.Ft int
.Fn sema_trywait "struct sema *sema"
.Ft int
.Fn sema_value "struct sema *sema"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Counting semaphores provide a mechanism for synchronizing access to a pool of
resources.
Unlike mutexes, semaphores do not have the concept of an owner, so they can also
be useful in situations where one thread needs to acquire a resource, and
another thread needs to release it.
Each semaphore has an integer value associated with it.
Posting (incrementing) always succeeds, but waiting (decrementing) can only
successfully complete if the resulting value of the semaphore is greater than or
equal to zero.
.Pp
Semaphores should not be used where mutexes and condition variables
will suffice.
Semaphores are a more complex synchronization mechanism than mutexes and
condition variables, and are not as efficient.
.Pp
Semaphores are created with
.Fn sema_init ,
where
.Fa sema
is a pointer to space for a
.Vt "struct sema" ,
.Fa value
is the initial value of the semaphore, and
.Fa description
is a pointer to a null-terminated character string that describes the semaphore.
Semaphores are destroyed with
.Fn sema_destroy .
A semaphore is posted (incremented) with
.Fn sema_post .
A semaphore is waited on (decremented) with
.Fn sema_wait ,
.Fn sema_timedwait ,
or
.Fn sema_trywait .
The
.Fa timo
argument to
.Fn sema_timedwait
specifies the minimum time in ticks to wait before returning with failure.
.Fn sema_value
is used to read the current value of the semaphore.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn sema_value
function
returns the current value of the semaphore.
.Pp
If decrementing the semaphore would result in its value being negative,
.Fn sema_trywait
returns 0 to indicate failure.
Otherwise, a non-zero value is returned to indicate success.
.Pp
The
.Fn sema_timedwait
function
returns 0 if waiting on the semaphore succeeded; otherwise a
non-zero error code is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn sema_timedwait
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EWOULDBLOCK
Timeout expired.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr condvar 9 ,
.Xr locking 9 ,
.Xr mtx_pool 9 ,
.Xr mutex 9 ,
.Xr rwlock 9 ,
.Xr sx 9
