.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Seccuris Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This documentation was written by Robert N. M. Watson under contract to
.\" Seccuris Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 28, 2007
.Dt SF_BUF 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sf_buf
.Nd manage temporary kernel address space mapping for memory pages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/sf_buf.h
.Ft struct sf_buf *
.Fn sf_buf_alloc "struct vm_page *m" "int flags"
.Ft void
.Fn sf_buf_free "struct sf_buf *sf"
.Ft vm_offset_t
.Fn sf_buf_kva "struct sf_buf *sf"
.Ft struct vm_page *
.Fn sf_buf_page "struct sf_buf *sf"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface, historically the
.Xr sendfile 2
buffer interface, allows kernel subsystems to manage temporary kernel address
space mappings for physical memory pages.
On systems with a direct memory map region (allowing all physical pages to be
visible in the kernel address space at all times), the
.Vt "struct sf_buf"
will point to an address in the direct map region; on systems without a
direct memory map region, the
.Vt "struct sf_buf"
will manage a temporary kernel address space mapping valid for the lifetime
of the
.Vt "struct sf_buf".
.Pp
Call
.Fn sf_buf_alloc
to allocate a
.Vt "struct sf_buf"
for a physical memory page.
.Fn sf_buf_alloc
is not responsible for arranging for the page to be present in physical
memory; the caller should already have arranged for the page to be wired,
i.e., by calling
.Xr vm_page_wire 9 .
Several flags may be passed to
.Fn sf_buf_alloc :
.Bl -tag -width SFB_CPUPRIVATE
.It Dv SFB_CATCH
Cause
.Fn sf_buf_alloc
to abort and return
.Dv NULL
if a signal is received waiting for a
.Vt "struct sf_buf"
to become available.
.It Dv SFB_NOWAIT
Cause
.Fn sf_buf_alloc
to return
.Dv NULL
rather than sleeping if a
.Vt "struct sf_buf"
is not immediately available.
.It Dv SFB_CPUPRIVATE
Cause
.Fn sf_buf_alloc
to only arrange that the temporary mapping be valid on the current CPU,
avoiding unnecessary TLB shootdowns for mappings that will only be accessed
on a single CPU at a time.
The caller must ensure that accesses to the virtual address occur only on the
CPU from which
.Fn sf_buf_alloc
was invoked, perhaps by using
.Fn sched_pin .
.El
.Pp
Call
.Fn sf_buf_kva
to return a kernel mapped address for the page.
.Pp
Call
.Fn sf_buf_page
to return a pointer to the page originally passed into
.Fn sf_buf_alloc .
.Pp
Call
.Fn sf_buf_free
to release the
.Vt "struct sf_buf"
reference.
The caller is responsible for releasing any wiring they have previously
acquired on the physical page;
.Fn sf_buf_free
releases only the temporary kernel address space mapping, not the page
itself.
.Pp
Uses of this interface include managing mappings of borrowed pages from user
memory, such as in zero-copy socket I/O, or pages of memory from the buffer
cache referenced by mbuf external storage for
.Xr sendfile 2 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sendfile 2 ,
.Xr vm_page_wire 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Vt "struct sf_buf"
API was designed and implemented by
.An Alan L. Cox .
This manual page was written by
.An Robert N. M. Watson .
