.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 10, 2001
.Dt UIDINFO 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uidinfo ,
.Nm uihashinit ,
.Nm uifind ,
.Nm uihold ,
.Nm uifree
.Nd "functions for managing UID information"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/proc.h
.In sys/resourcevar.h
.Ft void
.Fn uihashinit void
.Ft "struct uidinfo *"
.Fn uifind "uid_t uid"
.Ft void
.Fn uihold "struct uidinfo *uip"
.Ft void
.Fn uifree "struct uidinfo *uip"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
family of functions
is used to manage
.Vt uidinfo
structures.
Each
.Vt uidinfo
structure maintains per uid resource consumption counts, including the
process count and socket buffer space usage.
.Pp
The
.Fn uihashinit
function initializes the
.Vt uidinfo
hash table and its mutex.
This function should only be called during system initialization.
.Pp
The
.Fn uifind
function looks up and returns the
.Vt uidinfo
structure for
.Fa uid .
If no
.Vt uidinfo
structure exists for
.Fa uid ,
a new structure will be allocated and initialized.
The
.Nm
hash mutex is acquired and released.
.Pp
The
.Fn uihold
function increases the reference count on
.Fa uip .
.Fa uip Ns 's
lock is acquired and released.
.Pp
The
.Fn uifree
function decreases the reference count on
.Fa uip ,
and if the count reaches 0
.Fa uip
is freed.
.Fa uip Ns 's
lock is acquired and release and the uidinfo hash mutex may be
acquired and released.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn uifind
returns a pointer to an initialized
.Vt uidinfo
structure, and should not fail.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
