.\" $OpenBSD: usbd_transfer.9,v 1.7 2015/05/04 14:36:26 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Martin Pieuchot
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 4 2015 $
.Dt USBD_TRANSFER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm usbd_setup_xfer , usbd_transfer
.Nd submit USB data transfers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In dev/usb/usb.h
.In dev/usb/usbdi.h
.Ft void
.Fn usbd_setup_xfer "struct usbd_xfer *xfer" "struct usbd_pipe *pipe" \
 "void *priv" "void *buffer" "uint32_t length" "uint16_t flags" \
 "uint32_t timeout" "usbd_callback callback"
.Ft usbd_status
.Fn usbd_transfer "struct usbd_xfer *xfer"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions provide a controller independent mechanism to perform USB
data transfers.
They make use of a pipe created by
.Xr usbd_open_pipe 9
or
.Xr usbd_open_pipe_intr 9 .
.Pp
The function
.Fn usbd_setup_xfer
is used to initialize the structure pointed to by
.Fa xfer ,
describing an individual transfer to submit.
It takes the following arguments:
.Bl -tag -width callback
.It Fa xfer
A pointer to an existing structure describing a transfer.
.It Fa pipe
A pointer to a pipe associated with the endpoint for the transfer.
.It Fa priv
A pointer to a private cookie untouched by the USB stack for reuse in the
.Fa callback .
.It Fa buffer
A pointer to the data buffer.
.It Fa length
The total length of the data to read or write.
.It Fa flags
The characteristics of the transfer:
.Bl -tag -width xxx -offset indent
.It Dv USBD_NO_COPY
Do not copy data between
.Fa buffer
and the DMA buffer.
.It Dv USBD_SYNCHRONOUS
Causes
.Fn usbd_transfer
to sleep until the I/O transfer is complete or the
.Fa timeout
expires.
.It Dv USBD_SHORT_XFER_OK
Do not report short reads, when the length of the data read is lower than
.Fa length ,
as errors.
.It Dv USBD_FORCE_SHORT_XFER
Submit a supplementary zero length packet at the end of the written data.
Some requests may need such packets in order to be properly terminated.
.It Dv USBD_CATCH
Used in conjunction with the
.Dv USBD_SYNCHRONOUS
flag to pass the
.Dv PCATCH
flag to
.Xr tsleep 9
in order to check for signals before and after sleeping.
.El
.It Fa timeout
Timeout of the transfer in milliseconds.
.It Fa callback
A routine invoked upon completion of the transfer whether successful or not.
.El
.Pp
The function
.Fn usbd_transfer
is used to submit the USB transfer described by
.Fa xfer
to the corresponding
.Xr usb 4
host controller to perform I/O with devices.
.Sh CONTEXT
.Fn usbd_setup_xfer
can be called during autoconf, from process context, or from interrupt context.
.Pp
.Fn usbd_transfer
can be called during autoconf, from process context, or from interrupt context
if
.Dv USBD_SYNCHRONOUS
has not been passed via
.Fa flags .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ehci 4 ,
.Xr ohci 4 ,
.Xr uhci 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr tsleep 9 ,
.Xr usbd_open_pipe 9 ,
.Xr usbd_open_pipe_intr 9
