.\"	$OpenBSD: uvm_fault.9,v 1.1 2019/12/05 15:14:28 mpi Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: uvm.9,v 1.14 2000/06/29 06:08:44 mrg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Matthew R. Green
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 5 2019 $
.Dt UVM_FAULT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uvm_fault
.Nd page fault handling
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In uvm/uvm.h
.Ft int
.Fn uvm_fault "vm_map_t orig_map" "vaddr_t vaddr" "vm_fault_t fault_type" "vm_prot_t access_type"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn uvm_fault
function is the main entry point for faults.
It takes
.Fa orig_map
as the map the fault originated in, a
.Fa vaddr
offset into the map the fault occurred,
.Fa fault_type
describing the type of fault, and
.Fa access_type
describing the type of access requested.
.Fn uvm_fault
returns a standard errno.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pmap 9
