.\"     $OpenBSD: vdevgone.9,v 1.8 2020/11/14 10:35:58 jmc Exp $
.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Peter Werner
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 14 2020 $
.Dt VDEVGONE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vdevgone
.Nd revoke all specified minor numbered vnodes for a device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft void
.Fo vdevgone
.Fa "int maj"
.Fa "int minl"
.Fa "int minh"
.Fa "enum vtype type"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vdevgone
function will revoke all the vnodes corresponding to the specified minor
number range for the device with a major number of
.Fa maj
and of type
.Fa type .
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width "type"
.It Fa maj
The major number of the device.
.It Fa minl
The lowest minor number for the device to be revoked.
.It Fa minh
The highest minor number for the device to be revoked.
.It Fa type
The type of the device; this must be one of:
.Bl -tag -width "VBLK"
.It Dv VBLK
Device is a block device
.It Dv VCHR
Device is a character device
.El
.El
.Pp
The endpoints specified by
.Fa minl
and
.Fa minh
are inclusive.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vfinddev 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh HISTORY
This man page was originally written for
.Ox .
