.\"     $OpenBSD: vflush.9,v 1.7 2020/11/14 10:35:58 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/vflush.9,v 1.2 2001/12/14 09:11:13 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 14 2020 $
.Dt VFLUSH 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vflush
.Nd flush vnodes for a mount point
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn vflush "struct mount *mp" "struct vnode *skipvp" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vflush
function removes any vnodes in the vnode table that belong to the given
mount structure.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width "rootrefs"
.It Fa mp
The mount point whose vnodes should be removed.
.It Fa skipvp
If this is given, the vnode it represents will be skipped.
.It Fa flags
The flags indicating how vnodes should be handled.
.Bl -tag -width "WRITECLOSE"
.It Dv FORCECLOSE
If set, busy vnodes will be forcibly closed.
.It Dv SKIPSYSTEM
If set, vnodes with the
.Dv VSYSTEM
flag set will be skipped.
.It Dv WRITECLOSE
If set, only regular files currently opened for writing will be removed.
.El
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
A value of 0 is returned if the flush is successful; otherwise,
.Er EBUSY
will be returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vgone 9 ,
.Xr vgonel 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr vrele 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was originally written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca
for
.Fx .
