.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 21, 2001
.Dt VFS_GETVFS 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vfs_getvfs
.Nd "returns a mount point given its file system identifier"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/mount.h
.Ft "struct mount *"
.Fn vfs_getvfs "fsid_t *fsid"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vfs_getvfs
function returns the mount point structure for a file system given its file system
identifier.
The file system ID should have been allocated by calling
.Xr vfs_getnewfsid 9 ;
otherwise, it will not be found.
.Pp
A major user of
.Fn vfs_getvfs
is NFS, which uses the
.Vt fsid
as part of file handles in order to determine the
file system a given RPC is for.
If
.Fn vfs_getvfs
fails to find the mount point related to
.Fa fsid ,
the file system is considered stale.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If
.Fa fsid
is found, the mount point for the ID is returned; otherwise,
.Dv NULL
is returned.
.Sh PSEUDOCODE
.Bd -literal
if ((mp = vfs_getvfs(&fhp->fh_fsid)) == NULL) {
	error = ESTALE;
	goto out;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vfs_getnewfsid 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
