.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 16, 2018
.Dt VFS_SET 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VFS_SET
.Nd set up loadable file system
.Vt vfsconf
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/kernel.h
.In sys/module.h
.In sys/mount.h
.Ft void
.Fn VFS_SET "struct vfsops *vfsops" "fsname" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn VFS_SET
creates a
.Vt vfsconf
structure for the loadable module with the given
.Fa vfsops , fsname
and
.Fa flags ,
and declares it by calling
.Xr DECLARE_MODULE 9
using
.Fn vfs_modevent
as the event handler.
.Pp
Possible values for the
.Fa flags
argument are:
.Bl -hang -width ".Dv VFCF_DELEGADMIN"
.It Dv VFCF_STATIC
File system should be statically available in the kernel.
.It Dv VFCF_NETWORK
Network exportable file system.
.It Dv VFCF_READONLY
Does not support write operations.
.It Dv VFCF_SYNTHETIC
Pseudo file system, data does not represent on-disk files.
.It Dv VFCF_LOOPBACK
Loopback file system layer.
.It Dv VFCF_UNICODE
File names are stored as Unicode.
.It Dv VFCF_JAIL
Can be mounted from within a jail if
.Va allow.mount
and
.Va allow.mount.<fsname>
jail parameters are set.
.It Dv VFCF_DELEGADMIN
Supports delegated administration if
.Va vfs.usermount
sysctl is set to
.Dv 1 .
.It Dv VFCF_SBDRY
When in VFS method, the thread suspension is deferred to the user
boundary upon arrival of stop action.
.El
.Sh PSEUDOCODE
.Bd -literal
/*
 * Fill in the fields for which we have special methods.
 * The others are initially null.  This tells vfs to change them to
 * pointers to vfs_std* functions during file system registration.
 */
static struct vfsops myfs_vfsops = {
        .vfs_mount =    myfs_mount,
        .vfs_root =     myfs_root,
        .vfs_statfs =   myfs_statfs,
        .vfs_unmount =  myfs_unmount,
};

VFS_SET(myfs_vfsops, myfs, 0);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr jail 2 ,
.Xr jail 8 ,
.Xr DECLARE_MODULE 9 ,
.Xr vfs_modevent 9 ,
.Xr vfsconf 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
