.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Alfred Perlstein
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following condition
.\" is met:
.\"    Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this condition and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 4, 2010
.Dt VFS_CHECKEXP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VFS_CHECKEXP
.Nd check if a file system is exported to a client
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/mount.h
.Ft int
.Fn VFS_CHECKEXP "struct mount *mp" "struct sockaddr *nam" "int *exflagsp" "struct ucred **credanonp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn VFS_CHECKEXP
macro is used by the NFS server to check if a mount point is exported
to a client.
.Pp
The arguments it expects are:
.Bl -tag -width credanonp
.It Fa mp
The mount point to be checked.
.It Fa nam
An mbuf containing the network address of the client.
.It Fa exflagsp
Return parameter for the export flags for this client.
.It Fa credanonp
Return parameter for the anonymous credentials for this client.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn VFS_CHECKEXP
macro should be called on a file system's mount structure to determine if it
is exported to a client whose address is contained in
.Fa nam .
.Pp
It is generally called before
.Xr VFS_FHTOVP 9
to validate that a client has access to the file system.
.Pp
The file system should call
.Xr vfs_export_lookup 9
with the address of an appropriate
.Vt netexport
structure and the address of the client,
.Fa nam ,
to verify that the client can access this file system.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The export flags and anonymous credentials specific to the client (returned
by
.Xr vfs_export_lookup 9 )
will be returned in
.Fa *exflagsp
and
.Fa *credanonp .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr VFS 9 ,
.Xr VFS_FHTOVP 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr VOP_VPTOFH 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alfred Perlstein .
