.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 4, 2010
.Dt VFS_FHTOVP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VFS_FHTOVP
.Nd turn an NFS filehandle into a vnode
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/mount.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VFS_FHTOVP "struct mount *mp" "struct fid *fhp" "struct vnode **vpp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn VFS_FHTOVP
macro is used by the NFS server to turn an NFS filehandle into a vnode.
.Pp
The arguments it expects are:
.Bl -tag -width vpp
.It Fa mp
The file system.
.It Fa fhp
The filehandle to convert.
.It Fa vpp
Return parameter for the new locked vnode.
.El
.Pp
The contents of the filehandle are defined by the file system and are
not examined by any other part of the system.
It should contain
enough information to uniquely identify a file within the file system
as well as noticing when a file has been removed and the file system
resources have been reused for a new file.
For instance, UFS
file system stores the inode number and inode generation counter in its
filehandle.
.Pp
A call to
.Fn VFS_FHTOVP
should generally be preceded by a call to
.Xr VFS_CHECKEXP 9
to check if the file is accessible to the client.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The locked vnode for the file will be returned in
.Fa *vpp .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr VFS 9 ,
.Xr VFS_CHECKEXP 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr VOP_VPTOFH 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
