.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 23, 2009
.Dt VFS_UNMOUNT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VFS_UNMOUNT
.Nd unmount a file system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/mount.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VFS_UNMOUNT "struct mount *mp" "int mntflags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn VFS_UNMOUNT
macro unmounts a file system.
.Pp
The arguments it expects are:
.Bl -tag -width mntflags
.It Fa mp
The file system.
.It Fa mntflags
Bit-mask of flags for the unmount operation.
The flags currently supported by
.Fn VFS_UNMOUNT
are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv MNT_FORCE"
.It Dv MNT_FORCE
Open files are forcibly closed before the file system is unmounted.
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vflush 9 ,
.Xr VFS 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
