.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Alfred Perlstein
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 2, 2004
.Dt VFS_SUSER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vfs_suser
.Nd check if credentials have superuser privileges for a mount point
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/systm.h
.In sys/mount.h
.Ft int
.Fn vfs_suser "struct mount *mp" "struct thread *td"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vfs_suser
function checks if the credentials given include superuser powers
for the given mount point.
It will check to see if the thread
passed in has the same credentials as the user that mounted the
file system.
If so, it returns 0, otherwise it returns what
.Xr priv_check 9
would have returned.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn vfs_suser
function returns 0 if the user has superuser powers and
.Er EPERM
otherwise.
This is the
.Em reverse logic
of some other implementations of
.Fn suser
in which a TRUE response indicates superuser powers.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr chroot 2 ,
.Xr jail 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn vfs_suser
function was introduced in
.Fx 5.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alfred Perlstein .
