.\"     $OpenBSD: vget.9,v 1.12 2018/05/27 06:02:14 visa Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/vget.9,v 1.7 2001/12/26 23:14:04 davidc Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 27 2018 $
.Dt VGET 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vget
.Nd get a vnode from the free list
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn vget "struct vnode *vp" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Get a vnode from the free list and increment its reference count.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width flags
.It Fa vp
The vnode to remove from the free list.
.It Fa flags
If non-zero, the vnode will also be locked.
.El
.Pp
When not in use, vnodes are kept on a free list.
The vnodes still
reference valid files but may be reused to refer to a new file at any
time.
Often, these vnodes are also held in caches in the system, such
as the name cache.
.Pp
When a vnode which is on the free list is used again, for instance if
the vnode was found in the name cache as a result of a call to
.Xr VOP_LOOKUP 9 ,
then the new user must call
.Fn vget
to increment the reference count and remove it from the free list.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The vnode
.Fa vp
is in the process of being cleaned out from the underlying
file system.
.It Bq Er EBUSY
The vnode
.Fa vp
is in the process of being cleaned out from the underlying file system, and
it wasn't possible to sleep on it because the
.Dv LK_NOWAIT
flag was specified.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr vput 9 ,
.Xr vref 9 ,
.Xr vrele 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was originally written by
.An Doug Rabson
for
.Fx .
