.\"     $OpenBSD: vgone.9,v 1.10 2020/08/05 11:10:24 tim Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/vgone.9,v 1.2 2001/12/14 09:11:13 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: August 5 2020 $
.Dt VGONE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vgone ,
.Nm vgonel
.Nd prepare a vnode for reuse
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft void
.Fn vgone "struct vnode *vp"
.Ft void
.Fn vgonel "struct vnode *vp" "struct proc *p"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn vgone
and
.Fn vgonel
prepare the vnode
.Fa vp
for reuse by another file system.
The preparation includes the cleaning of all file system specific data and
the removal from its mount point vnode list.
The
.Fa p
argument specifies the process responsible for the call.
.Pp
.Fn vgone
is identical to
.Fn vgonel
with a
.Fa p
value of
.Dv curproc .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vclean 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr vrecycle 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was originally written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca
for
.Fx .
