.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 20, 2008
.Dt VINVALBUF 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vinvalbuf
.Nd "flushes and invalidates all buffers associated with a vnode"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn vinvalbuf "struct vnode *vp" "int flags" "struct ucred *cred" "int slpflag" "int slptimeo"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vinvalbuf
function invalidates all of the buffers associated with the given vnode.
This includes buffers on the clean list and the dirty list.
If the
.Dv V_SAVE
flag is specified then the buffers on the dirty list are synced prior to being
released.
If there is a VM Object associated with the vnode, it is removed.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa spltimeo"
.It Fa vp
A pointer to the vnode whose buffers will be invalidated.
.It Fa flags
The only supported flag is
.Dv V_SAVE
and it indicates that dirty buffers should be synced with the disk.
.It Fa cred
The user credentials that are used to
.Xr VOP_FSYNC 9
buffers if
.Dv V_SAVE
is set.
.It Fa slpflag
The slp flag that will be used in the priority of any sleeps in the function.
.It Fa slptimeo
The timeout for any sleeps in the function.
.El
.Sh LOCKS
The vnode is assumed to be locked prior to the call and remains locked upon return.
.Pp
.Va Giant
must be held by prior to the call and remains locked upon return.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
A 0 value is returned on success.
.Sh PSEUDOCODE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
vn_lock(devvp, LK_EXCLUSIVE | LK_RETRY);
error = vinvalbuf(devvp, V_SAVE, cred, 0, 0);
VOP_UNLOCK(devvp, 0);
if (error)
	return (error);
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOSPC
The file system is full.
(With
.Dv V_SAVE )
.It Bq Er EDQUOT
Disc quota exceeded.
(With
.Dv V_SAVE )
.It Bq Er EWOULDBLOCK
Sleep operation timed out.
(See
.Fa slptimeo )
.It Bq Er ERESTART
A signal needs to be delivered and the system call should be restarted.
(With
.Dv PCATCH
set in
.Fa slpflag )
.It Bq Er EINTR
The system has been interrupted by a signal.
(With
.Dv PCATCH
set in
.Fa slpflag )
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tsleep 9 ,
.Xr VOP_FSYNC 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
