.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 19, 2003
.Dt VM_MAP_PROTECT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_map_protect
.Nd apply protection bits to a virtual memory region
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_map.h
.Ft int
.Fo vm_map_protect
.Fa "vm_map_t map" "vm_offset_t start" "vm_offset_t end" "vm_prot_t new_prot"
.Fa "boolean_t set_max"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_map_protect
function sets the protection bits of the address region bounded by
.Fa start
and
.Fa end
within the map
.Fa map
to
.Fa new_prot .
.Pp
If
.Fa set_max
is TRUE,
.Fa new_prot
is treated as the new
.Va max_protection
setting for each underlying entry.
Otherwise, only the
.Va protection
field is affected.
.Pp
The range MUST be contiguous, and MUST NOT contain sub-maps.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The function acquires a lock on the
.Fa map
for the duration, by calling
.Xr vm_map_lock 9 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn vm_map_protect
function returns
.Dv KERN_SUCCESS
if the protection bits could be set successfully.
.Pp
If a sub-map entry was encountered in the range,
.Dv KERN_INVALID_ARGUMENT
is returned.
If the value of
.Fa new_prot
would exceed
.Va max_protection
for an entry within the range,
.Dv KERN_PROTECTION_FAILURE
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vm_map 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
