.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 11, 2013
.Dt VM_MAP_INSERT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_map_insert
.Nd insert an object into a map
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_map.h
.Ft int
.Fo vm_map_insert
.Fa "vm_map_t map" "vm_object_t object" "vm_ooffset_t offset"
.Fa "vm_offset_t start" "vm_offset_t end" "vm_prot_t prot"
.Fa "vm_prot_t max" "int cow"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_map_insert
function inserts a mapping for the entire vm_object
.Fa object
into the target map
.Fa map .
.Pp
The
.Fa offset
argument specifies the offset into the
.Fa object
at which to begin mapping.
The object's size should match that of the specified address range.
.Pp
The
.Fa start
and
.Fa end
arguments specify the bounds of the mapped object's window in the
address space of
.Fa map .
.Pp
The
.Fa cow
argument specifies the flags which should be propagated to the new entry,
for example, to indicate that this is a copy-on-write mapping.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
This function implicitly creates a new
.Vt vm_map_entry
by calling the internal function
.Fn vm_map_entry_create .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn vm_map_insert
function returns
.Dv KERN_SUCCESS
if the mapping could be made successfully.
.Pp
Otherwise,
.Dv KERN_INVALID_ADDRESS
will be returned if the start of the range could not be found, or
.Dv KERN_NO_SPACE
if the range was found to be part of an existing entry or if it
overlaps the end of the map.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vm_map 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
