.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 9, 2011
.Dt VM_MAP_SYNC 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_map_sync
.Nd push dirty pages to their pager
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_map.h
.Ft int
.Fo vm_map_sync
.Fa "vm_map_t map" "vm_offset_t start" "vm_offset_t end" "boolean_t syncio"
.Fa "boolean_t invalidate"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_map_sync
function forces any dirty cached pages in the range
.Fa start
to
.Fa end
within the
.Fa map
to be pushed to their underlying pager.
.Pp
If
.Fa syncio
is TRUE, dirty pages are written synchronously.
.Pp
If
.Fa invalidate
is TRUE, any cached pages are also freed.
.Pp
The range provided must be contiguous, it MUST NOT contain holes.
The range provided MUST NOT contain any sub-map entries.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn vm_map_sync
function returns
.Dv KERN_SUCCESS
if successful.
.Pp
Otherwise,
.Dv KERN_INVALID_ADDRESS
will be returned if the function encountered a sub-map entry;
.Dv KERN_INVALID_ARGUMENT
will be returned if the function encountered a hole in the region provided,
or if an entry could not be found for the given start address.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vm_map 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
