.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 17, 2001
.Dt VM_PAGE_INSERT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_page_insert ,
.Nm vm_page_remove
.Nd "add/remove page from an object"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_page.h
.Ft void
.Fn vm_page_insert "vm_page_t m" "vm_object_t object" "vm_pindex_t pindex"
.Ft void
.Fn vm_page_remove "vm_page_t m"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_page_insert
function adds a page to the given object at the given index.
The page is added to both the VM page hash table and to the
object's list of pages, but the hardware page tables are not updated.
In the case of a user page, it will be faulted in when it is
accessed.
If the page is a kernel page, the caller is expected to
handle adding the page to the kernel's pmap.
.Pp
If
.Dv PG_WRITEABLE
is set in the page's flags,
.Dv OBJ_WRITEABLE
and
.Dv OBJ_MIGHTBEDIRTY
are set in the object's flags.
.Pp
The
.Fn vm_page_remove
function removes the given page from its object, and from the
VM page hash table.
The page must be busy prior to this call, or the system will panic.
The pmap entry for the page is not removed by this function.
.Pp
The arguments to
.Fn vm_page_insert
are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa object"
.It Fa m
The page to add to the object.
.It Fa object
The object the page should be added to.
.It Fa pindex
The index into the object the page should be at.
.El
.Pp
The arguments to
.Fn vm_page_remove
are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa m"
.It Fa m
The page to remove.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The index of a page in a VM object is the byte index into the
same object truncated to a page boundary.
For example, if the page size is 4096 bytes, and the address
in the object is 81944, the page index is 20.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
