.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 17, 2001
.Dt VM_PAGE_RENAME 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_page_rename
.Nd "move a page"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_page.h
.Ft void
.Fo vm_page_rename
.Fa "vm_page_t m"
.Fa "vm_object_t new_object"
.Fa "vm_pindex_t new_pindex"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_page_rename
function removes a page from one object, and adds it to another
at the given page index.
The page is added to the given object, and is removed from the
object that is currently associated with.
If the page is currently on the cache queue it will be deactivated
unless it is wired or unmanaged, in which case the deactivation will
fail.
The entire page is marked as dirty after the move.
.Pp
The arguments to
.Fn vm_page_rename
are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa new_object"
.It Fa m
The page to move.
.It Fa new_object
The object the page should be inserted into.
.It Fa new_pindex
The page index into
.Fa new_object
at which the new page should be inserted.
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
