.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\"
.\" Portions of this documentation were written by Konstantin Belousov
.\" under sponsorship from the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 23, 2013
.Dt VM_PAGE_GRAB 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_page_grab
.Nd "returns a page from an object"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_page.h
.Ft vm_page_t
.Fn vm_page_grab "vm_object_t object" "vm_pindex_t pindex" "int allocflags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_page_grab
function returns the page at
.Fa pindex
from the given object.
If the page exists and is busy,
.Fn vm_page_grab
will sleep while waiting for it.
If the page does not exist, it is allocated.
The function sleeps until the allocation request can be satisfied.
.Pp
The function requires the
.Fa object
to be locked on entry, and returns with the object locked.
If the
.Fn vm_page_grab
function sleeps for any reason, the object lock is temporary dropped.
.Pp
The
.Fn vm_page_grab
supports all of the flags supported by
.Xr vm_page_alloc 9 .
In addition,
.Fn vm_page_grab
supports the following flags:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv VM_ALLOC_IGN_SBUSY"
.It Dv VM_ALLOC_IGN_SBUSY
When waiting for the busy state of the existing page to drain,
only test for exclusive busy; ignore the shared busy counter.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn vm_page_grab
always returns the page.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vm_page_alloc 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca .
