.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 24, 1996
.Dt VOP_REMOVE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_REMOVE ,
.Nm VOP_RMDIR
.Nd remove a file or directory
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_REMOVE "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode *vp" "struct componentname *cnp"
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_RMDIR "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode *vp" "struct componentname *cnp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These entry points remove files and directories respectively.
.Pp
The arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width dvp
.It Fa dvp
The vnode of the directory.
.It Fa vp
The vnode of the file to be removed.
.It Fa cnp
Pathname information about the file.
.El
.Sh LOCKS
Both
.Fa dvp
and
.Fa vp
should be locked on entry and remain locked on return.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error code is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EPERM
The file is immutable.
.It Bq Er ENOTEMPTY
An attempt was made to remove a directory which is not empty.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr VOP_LOOKUP 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
