.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 24, 1996
.Dt VOP_IOCTL 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_IOCTL
.Nd device specific control
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_IOCTL "struct vnode *vp" "u_long command" "caddr_t data" "int fflag" "struct ucred *cred" "struct thread *td"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Manipulate a file in device dependent ways.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width command
.It Fa vp
The vnode of the file (normally representing a device).
.It Fa command
The device specific operation to perform.
.It Fa data
Extra data for the specified operation.
.It Fa fflag
Some flags ???
.It Fa cred
The caller's credentials.
.It Fa td
The calling thread.
.El
.Pp
Most file systems do not implement this entry point.
.Sh LOCKS
The file should not be locked on entry.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, zero is returned, otherwise an appropriate error code.
.Pp
If the ioctl is not recognized or not handled,
.Er ENOTTY
should be returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
