.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 8, 2018
.Dt VOP_LOOKUP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_LOOKUP
.Nd lookup a component of a pathname
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.In sys/namei.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_LOOKUP "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode **vpp" "struct componentname *cnp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This entry point looks up a single pathname component in a given directory.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width vpp
.It Fa dvp
The locked vnode of the directory to search.
.It Fa vpp
The address of a variable where the resulting locked vnode should be stored.
.It Fa cnp
The pathname component to be searched for.
It is a pointer to a componentname structure defined as follows:
.Bd -literal
struct componentname {
	/*
	 * Arguments to lookup.
	 */
	u_long	cn_nameiop;	/* namei operation */
	u_long	cn_flags;	/* flags to namei */
	struct	thread *cn_thread;	/* thread requesting lookup */
	struct	ucred *cn_cred;	/* credentials */
	int     cn_lkflags;     /* Lock flags LK_EXCLUSIVE or LK_SHARED */
	/*
	 * Shared between lookup and commit routines.
	 */
	char	*cn_pnbuf;	/* pathname buffer */
	char	*cn_nameptr;	/* pointer to looked up name */
	long	cn_namelen;	/* length of looked up component */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Convert a component of a pathname into a pointer to a locked vnode.
This is a very central and rather complicated routine.
If the file system is not maintained in a strict tree hierarchy,
this can result in a deadlock situation.
.Pp
The
.Fa cnp->cn_nameiop
argument is
.Dv LOOKUP ,
.Dv CREATE ,
.Dv RENAME ,
or
.Dv DELETE
depending on the intended use of the object.
When
.Dv CREATE ,
.Dv RENAME ,
or
.Dv DELETE
is specified, information usable in
creating, renaming, or deleting a directory entry may be calculated.
.Pp
Overall outline of VOP_LOOKUP:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
Check accessibility of directory.
Look for name in cache, if found, then return name.
Search for name in directory, goto to found or notfound as appropriate.
.Ed
.Pp
notfound:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
If creating or renaming and at end of pathname,
return
.Er EJUSTRETURN ,
leaving info on available slots else return
.Er ENOENT .
.Ed
.Pp
found:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
If at end of path and deleting, return information to allow delete.
If at end of path and renaming, lock target
inode and return info to allow rename.
If not at end, add name to cache; if at end and neither creating
nor deleting, add name to cache.
.Ed
.Sh LOCKS
The directory
.Fa dvp
should be locked on entry and exit, regardless of error condition.
If an entry is found in the directory, it will be returned locked.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned with
.Fa *vpp
set to the locked vnode of the file if the component is found.
If the component being searched for is ".", then the vnode just has
an extra reference added to it with
.Xr vref 9 .
The caller must take care to release the locks appropriately in this
case.
.Pp
If the component is not found and the operation is
.Dv CREATE
or
.Dv RENAME ,
the flag
.Dv ISLASTCN
is specified and the operation would succeed, the special return value
.Er EJUSTRETURN
is returned.
Otherwise, an appropriate error code is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
The vnode
.Fa dvp
does not represent a directory.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The component
.Fa dvp
was not found in this directory.
.It Bq Er EACCES
Access for the specified operation is denied.
.It Bq Er EJUSTRETURN
A
.Dv CREATE
or
.Dv RENAME
operation would be successful.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr VOP_ACCESS 9 ,
.Xr VOP_CREATE 9 ,
.Xr VOP_MKDIR 9 ,
.Xr VOP_MKNOD 9 ,
.Xr VOP_RENAME 9 ,
.Xr VOP_SYMLINK 9
.Sh HISTORY
The function
.Nm
appeared in
.Bx 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson ,
with some text from comments in
.Pa ufs_lookup.c .
