.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Konstantin Belousov <kib@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 24, 2016
.Dt VRELE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vput ,
.Nm vrele ,
.Nm vunref
.Nd decrement the use count for a vnode
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft void
.Fn vput "struct vnode *vp"
.Ft void
.Fn vrele "struct vnode *vp"
.Ft void
.Fn vunref "struct vnode *vp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Decrement the
.Va v_usecount
field of a vnode.
.Bl -tag -width 2n
.It Fa vp
the vnode to decrement
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn vrele
function takes an unlocked vnode and returns with the vnode unlocked.
.Pp
The
.Fn vput
function should be given a locked vnode as argument, the vnode is unlocked
after the function returned.
The
.Fn vput
is operationally equivalent to calling
.Xr VOP_UNLOCK 9
followed by
.Xr vrele 9 ,
with less overhead.
.Pp
The
.Fn vunref
function takes a locked vnode as argument, and returns with the vnode locked.
.Pp
Any code in the system which signified its use of a vnode by usecount
should call one of the listed function to decrement use counter.
If the
.Va v_usecount
field of the non-doomed vnode reaches zero, then it will be inactivated
and placed on the free list.
.Pp
The
.Fn vrele
function may lock the vnode.
All three functions may sleep.
.Pp
The hold count for the vnode is always greater or equal to the usecount.
Non-forced unmount fails when mount point owns a vnode that has non-zero
usecount, see
.Xr vflush 9 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vget 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr vref 9 ,
.Xr vrefcnt 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson
and
.An Konstantin Belousov .
